Kennywood is an amusement park in West Mifflin, Pennsylvania, just southeast of Pittsburgh. The park opened on May 30, 1898, as a trolley park attraction at the end of the Mellon family's Monongahela Street Railway.[1][2]

It was purchased in 1906 by F. W. Henninger and Andrew McSwigan, both of whom later formed the family-owned Kennywood Entertainment Company. The company later sold Kennywood, along with four other parks, in 2007 to Parques Reunidos, an international entertainment operator based in Spain.[6] In early 2025, the park was sold to Herschend.[7][8]

The amusement park features various structures and rides dating back to the early 1900s. Along with Rye Playland Park, it is one of two amusement parks in the United States designated as a National Historic Landmark. Kennywood is also one of thirteen trolley parks in the United States that remain in operation.

Kennywood is approximately 8 miles (13 km) from Downtown Pittsburgh, in West Mifflin, Pennsylvania. The park is along Pennsylvania Route 837 (Green Belt), known as Kennywood Boulevard as it passes through the borough. The closest Interstate connection is Exit 77 (Edgewood/Swissvale) on Interstate 376.[9] The Mon–Fayette Expressway will eventually go past Kennywood, which will prompt an expansion of the park when it is built.[10]

Historically, the park is across the river from the location of the July 9, 1755 Battle of the Monongahela, where British general Edward Braddock was mortally wounded, ending his expedition to capture the French Fort Duquesne during the French and Indian War. George Washington was a colonel to Braddock, and fought at the battle before they retreated.[11] Later the land on the bluff above the Monongahela River was part of a farm owned by Anthony Kenny. Around the time of the American Civil War, the site was a popular picnic grove for locals, known as "Kenny's Grove".[11]

A tree-filled portion of a farm overlooking the Monongahela River near Pittsburgh owned by Anthony Kenny, known as "Kenny's Grove", was a popular picnic spot for local residents during the American Civil War. In 1898, the Monongahela Street Railways Company, partially owned by prominent banker Andrew Mellon, seeking to increase fare profits on the weekends, leased the land from the Kenny family in order to create a trolley park at the end of their line.[11] The company's chief engineer, George S. Davidson, designed the original layout of the park and served as its first manager. A carousel, casino hall, and dance pavilion were added in 1899. A bandstand was constructed in 1900, while the Old Mill was constructed in 1901, and the park's first roller coaster, the Figure Eight Toboggan, was added in 1902.[12]

After less than a decade, the trolley company no longer wanted to manage the park. The standing manager, Andrew S. McSwigan, along with partners Frederick W. Henninger and A. F. Meghan, leased and operated the park as Kennywood Park Limited beginning in 1906.[11]

From its origin as a working-class picnic entertainment destination, the park grew in the first half of the twentieth century into a popular attraction that combined thrill rides with recreation venues such as swimming pools and dance halls.

Kennywood ceased to be served by streetcar when Mon Street Railways successor Pittsburgh Railways Company converted the route serving it, the lengthy #68 Duquesne-McKeesport line, from trolley to bus on September 15, 1958.

On December 12, 2007, Kennywood Entertainment announced that it would be selling Kennywood Park, along with four other amusement parks in the Northeastern United States, to Parques Reunidos, a company based in Madrid, Spain.[6]

On March 18, 2025, it was announced that Kennywood had been purchased by Herschend.[7][13]

Kennywood uses the slogans "Welcome to the family", "America's finest traditional amusement park", and "Make a new memory", although from the 1960s through the early 1990s the slogan was "The roller coaster capital of the world" (a title which is now used by Cedar Point). Kennywood features three wooden roller coasters still in working order (Jack Rabbit, Racer and Thunderbolt), along with three newer steel coasters (Phantom's Revenge, Sky Rocket and Steel Curtain) and one indoor coaster (The Exterminator).

The park holds several events throughout the year, including Phantom Fall Fest.[14]

For the past several years, Kennywood has been rated the "Favorite 'Dark Attraction Park'" by the Darkride and Funhouse Enthusiasts (DAFE).[26] Kennywood ranked second to Cedar Point in the category of "Favorite Park" in Theme Park Magazine's 2004 Reader's Choice Awards.[27]

The park was designated a U.S. National Historic Landmark in 1987.[5][28]

Kennywood has made use of the hilly Pittsburgh terrain to create coasters with unique layouts. Thunderbolt and Jack Rabbit, both wooden coasters, place the lift chain in the middle of the ride, not at the beginning. In both cases, the train leaves the station and drops into a valley as its first drop. Phantom's Revenge uses the same valley as Thunderbolt, and its second drop passes through the supports of Thunderbolt's first drop, making its second drop the longest and steepest drop of the ride.

Music is provided by a 1916 Wurlitzer style #153 Military Band Organ, which is the oldest of its kind in existence.

Kennywood Junction opened in 2018 as an expansion of Kiddieland, and was themed to Thomas the Tank Engine from 2018 to 2024.

1994–2004

2009–2020

1989–2005

Pittsburgh locals have often used the phrase "Kennywood's open" to tell someone that the zipper of their pants is down. The phrase is believed by former American Coaster Enthusiasts president Bill Linkenheimer, himself from the Pittsburgh suburb of Ross Township, to be unique to the park, saying that there is no equivalent for other parks like Cedar Point and Disneyland. The origin of the phrase is still shrouded in mystery, though Andy Quinn, himself a descendant of the McSwigan family which co-owned the park, suspects that it may have started as a joke made by park employees which spread relatively quickly. Some locals recall using the phrase as early as the 1940s.[47]

The park has been present in various pieces of media. In 1988, Rick Sebak made a film at the park titled Kennywood Memories, considered a classic WQED film by locals, as well as regarded by the Pittsburgh Tribune-Review as one of Sebak's most popular documentaries.[48][49][50] The 2009 film Adventureland was filmed at the park, though its appearance was heavily altered for filming.[51]

In 1987, rock singer Freddy Cannon recorded a remade version of his 1962 hit "Palisades Park" called "Kennywood Park", featuring attractions at Kennywood. The song was released on a limited-edition 45 vinyl pressing and sold as a $1.99 fundraising item for Pittsburgh's Children's Hospital through the now-defunct National Record Mart.[52][deprecated source]
