The following is a list providing an overview of sovereign states around the world with information on their status and recognition of their sovereignty.

The 205 listed states can be divided into three categories based on membership within the United Nations System: 193 UN member states,[1] 2 UN General Assembly non-member observer states, and 10 other states. The sovereignty dispute column indicates states having undisputed sovereignty (189 states, of which there are 188 UN member states and one UN General Assembly non-member observer state), states having disputed sovereignty (14 states, of which there are 5 UN member states, 1 UN General Assembly non-member observer state, and 8 de facto states), and states having a special political status (two states, both in free association with New Zealand).

Compiling a list such as this can be complicated and controversial, as there is no definition that is binding on all the members of the community of nations concerning the criteria for statehood. For more information on the criteria used to determine the contents of this list, please see the criteria for inclusion section below. The list is intended to include entities that have been recognised as having de facto status as sovereign states, and inclusion should not be seen as an endorsement of any specific claim to statehood in legal terms.

The dominant customary international law standard of statehood is the declarative theory of statehood, which was codified by the Montevideo Convention of 1933. The Convention defines the state as a person of international law if it "possess[es] the following qualifications: (a) a permanent population; (b) a defined territory; (c) government; and (d) a capacity to enter into relations with the other states" so long as it was not "obtained by force whether this consists in the employment of arms, in threatening diplomatic representations, or in any other effective coercive measure".[2]

Debate exists on the degree to which recognition should be included as a criterion of statehood. The declarative theory of statehood argues that statehood is purely objective and recognition of a state by other states is irrelevant. On the other end of the spectrum, the constitutive theory of statehood defines a state as a person under international law only if it is recognised as sovereign by other states. For the purposes of this list, included are all polities that consider themselves sovereign states (through a declaration of independence or some other means) and either:

In some cases, there is a divergence of opinion over the interpretation of the first point, and whether an entity satisfies it is disputed. Unique political entities which fail to meet the classification of a sovereign state are considered proto-states.[3][4]

On the basis of the above criteria, this list includes the following 205 entities:[a][b]

The table includes bullets in the right-hand column representing entities that are either not sovereign states or have a close association to another sovereign state. It also includes subnational areas where the sovereignty of the titular state is limited by an international agreement. Taken together, these include:

"Membership within the UN System" column legend

"Sovereignty dispute" column legend

and Brčko District, a self-governing administrative district.[14]

China claims, but does not control, Taiwan, which is governed by a rival administration (the Republic of China) that claims all of China as its territory.[p]

China is not recognised by 11 UN member states and Vatican City, which, with the exception of Bhutan, all recognise the Republic of China (Taiwan) instead.[q]

Cyprus is not recognised by Turkey due to the Cyprus problem, with Turkey recognising Northern Cyprus.

The metropolitan territory of Denmark, the Faroe Islands and Greenland form the three constituent countries of the Kingdom.[v] The Kingdom of Denmark as a whole is a member of the EU, but EU law (in most cases) does not apply to the Faroe Islands and Greenland. See Greenland and the European Union, and Faroe Islands and the European Union.[18][19]

Israel is not recognised as a state by 28 UN members and the Sahrawi Republic. The Palestine Liberation Organization, recognised by a majority of UN member states as the representative of the Palestinian people, recognised Israel in 1993.

The Metropolitan Netherlands, Aruba, Curaçao and Sint Maarten form the four constituent countries of the Kingdom. Three overseas parts of the Netherlands (Bonaire, Saba and Sint Eustatius) are special municipalities of the metropolitan Netherlands.[ae] The Kingdom of the Netherlands as a whole is a member of the EU, but EU law only wholly applies to parts within Europe.

The New Zealand Government acts for the entire Realm of New Zealand in all international contexts, which has responsibilities for (but no rights of control over) two freely associated states:

The Cook Islands and Niue have diplomatic relations with 63 and 25 UN members respectively.[35][36] They have full treaty-making capacity in the UN,[37] and are members of some UN specialized agencies.

Norway has one dependent territory and two claimed Antarctic dependent territories in the Southern Hemisphere:

Azad Kashmir describes itself as a "self-governing state under Pakistani control", while Gilgit-Baltistan is described in its governance order as a group of "areas" with self-government.[43][44][45] These territories are not usually regarded as sovereign, as they do not fulfil the criteria set out by the declarative theory of statehood (for example, their current laws do not allow them to engage independently in relations with other states). Several state functions of these territories (such as foreign affairs and defense) are performed by Pakistan.[44][46][47]

South Korea is not recognised by North Korea, which claims to be the sole legitimate government of Korea.

The Abyei Area is a zone with "special administrative status" established by the Comprehensive Peace Agreement in 2005. It is de jure a condominium of South Sudan and Sudan, but de facto administered by two competing administrations and the United Nations.[54][55]

The Abyei Area is a zone with "special administrative status" established by the Comprehensive Peace Agreement in 2005. It is de jure a condominium of South Sudan and Sudan, but de facto administered by two competing administrations and the United Nations.[54][55]

Syria has one self-declared autonomous region, Rojava.

The British monarch also has direct sovereignty over three self-governing Crown Dependencies:

Additionally, the federal government of the United States has sovereignty over 13 unincorporated territories. Of these unincorporated territories, five are inhabited possessions:

The United States also has sovereignty over eight uninhabited territories:

The United States disputes sovereignty over two territories:

Three sovereign states have become associated states of the United States under the Compact of Free Association:

"Membership within the UN System" column legend

"Sovereignty dispute" column legend

The territories under its control, the so-called Free Zone, are claimed in whole by Morocco. In turn, the Sahrawi Republic claims the Moroccan-occupied part of Western Sahara to the west of the Moroccan sand wall. Its government resides in exile in the Sahrawi refugee camps of Tindouf, Algeria.

In addition to these relations, the ROC also maintains unofficial relations[70] with 58 UN member states, one self-declared state (Somaliland), three territories (Guam, Hong Kong, and Macau), and the European Union via its representative offices and consulates under the One China principle. Taiwan has the 31st-largest diplomatic network in the world with 110 offices.[71]

The territory of the ROC is claimed in whole by the PRC.[p] The ROC participates in international organizations under a variety of pseudonyms, most commonly "Chinese Taipei". In the WTO, the ROC has full membership under the designation of "Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu". The ROC was a founding member of the UN and enjoyed membership from 1945 to 1971, with veto power in the UN Security Council. See China and the United Nations.
