The following table of United States cities by crime rate is based on Federal Bureau of Investigation Uniform Crime Reports (UCR) statistics from 2024 for the 200 most populous cities in America that have reported data to the FBI UCR system.[1][2]

The population numbers are based on U.S. Census estimates for the year end. The number of murders includes nonnegligent manslaughter. This list is based on the reporting. In most cases, the city and the reporting agency are identical. However, in Nashville and Las Vegas, the reporting agency has more than one municipality.

The combined table for 2024 does not include data for some large cities, such as Jacksonville,  Atlanta, New Orleans, and Orlando. Their data is presented separately, based on reports from previous years. More recent data can be accessed on the FBI site.[3]

Often, one obtains very different results depending on whether crime rates are measured for the city jurisdiction or the metropolitan area.[1][4]

Information is voluntarily submitted by each jurisdiction and some jurisdictions do not appear in the table because they either did not submit data or they did not meet deadlines.

The FBI document on the UCR methodology has the following disclaimer on population estimates:

Notes:

1 The FBI does not publish arson data unless it receives data from either the agency or the state for all 12 months of the calendar year.
2 Because of changes in this agency's reporting practices, figures are not comparable to previous years' data. 
3 Limited data for 2024 were available for Florida. 

Notes:

1 The figures shown in this column for the offense of rape were reported using only the revised Uniform Crime Reporting (UCR) definition of rape. See the data declaration for further explanation.
2 The FBI does not publish arson data unless it receives data from either the agency or the state for all 12 months of the calendar year. 
3 The FBI determined that the agency's data were underreported. Consequently, those data are not included in this table. 

The FBI web site recommends against using its data for ranking because these rankings lead to simplistic and/or incomplete analyses that often create misleading perceptions adversely affecting cities and counties, along with their residents.[7] The FBI web site also recommends against using its data to judge how effective law enforcement agencies are, since there are many factors other than law enforcement  that influence crime rates.[8]

In November 2007, the executive board of the American Society of Criminology (ASC) went further than the FBI itself, and approved a resolution opposing not only the use of the ratings to judge police departments, but also any development of city crime rankings from FBI Uniform Crime Reports (UCRs) at all. The resolution opposed these rankings on the grounds that they "fail to account for the many conditions affecting crime rates" and "divert attention from the individual and community characteristics that elevate crime in all cities", though it did not provide sources or further elaborate on these claims. The resolution states the rankings "represent an irresponsible misuse of the data and do groundless harm to many communities" and "work against a key goal of our society, which is a better understanding of crime-related issues by both scientists and the public".[9]

The U.S. Conference of Mayors passed a similar statement, which also committed the Conference to working with the FBI and the U.S. Department of Justice "to educate reporters, elected officials, and citizens on what the (UCR) data means and doesn't mean."[9]

 This article incorporates public domain material from The Crime Data Explorer. Federal Bureau of Investigation. Retrieved August 14, 2025.
