Night of the Living Dead is a zombie horror media franchise created by George A. Romero beginning with the 1968 film Night of the Living Dead, directed by Romero and cowritten with John A. Russo. The franchise predominantly centers on different groups of people attempting to survive during the outbreak and evolution of a zombie apocalypse. The latest installment of the series, Survival of the Dead, was released in 2009, with a sequel, Twilight of the Dead, in development. This would be the first film in the series not directed by George Romero, who died on July 16, 2017.

After Night of the Living Dead's initial success, the two creators split in disagreement regarding where the series should head,[1] and since the film was in the public domain,[2] each were able to do what they liked with the continuity of their projects. Romero went on to direct five additional Dead films, while Russo branched into literary territory, writing Return of the Living Dead, which was later loosely adapted into a film of the same name and would have its own franchise, and Escape of the Living Dead.

Labeled "Trilogy of the Dead" until Land of the Dead, each film is laden with social commentary on topics ranging from racism to consumerism. The films are not produced as direct follow-ups from one another and their only continuation is the theme of the epidemic of the living dead. This situation advances with each film, showing the world in a worsening state, but each film is independent of its predecessor.  This is exemplified by each movie being set within the era it is filmed, with Land of the Dead being set in modern times with 2005 technology including game consoles, flatscreen televisions and cell phones. The fifth film does not continue the depiction of progress, but shows events at the beginning of a zombie outbreak, similar to the first film. The films portray how different people react to the same phenomenon, ranging from citizens to police to army officials and to citizens again. Each takes place in a world worsened since its previous appearance, the number of zombies ever increasing and the living perpetually endangered, but with each entry being a standalone film that is not directly continuing global events from the previous.[clarification needed]

Romero does not consider any of his Dead films sequels since none of the major characters or story continue from one film to the next. The two exceptions are Tom Savini's character of Blades who becomes a zombie in Dawn of the Dead who would be seen again years later in Land of the Dead and the military officer (Alan van Sprang) who robs the main characters in Diary of the Dead and goes on to become a protagonist in Survival of the Dead.

The plot of the film follows Ben (Duane Jones), Barbra Cole (Judith O'Dea), and five others, who are trapped in a rural farmhouse in Pennsylvania and attempt to survive the night while the house is being attacked by mysteriously reanimated corpses, known as ghouls or zombies.

Following the scenario set up in Night of the Living Dead, the United States (and possibly the entire world) has been devastated by a phenomenon which reanimates recently deceased human beings as flesh-eating zombies. Despite efforts by the US Government and local civil authorities to control the situation, society has effectively collapsed and the remaining survivors seek refuge. Protagonists Roger (Scott Reiniger) and Peter (Ken Foree), two former SWAT members, join with Stephen (David Emge) and Francine (Gaylen Ross), a helicopter pilot and his girlfriend planning on leaving the city, and take refuge in an enclosed shopping-mall.

In the far future, zombies have overrun the world, and an underground army missile bunker near the Everglades holds part of a military-supported scientific team assigned to study the zombie phenomenon in the hopes of finding a way of stopping or reversing the process. Dwindling supplies, loss of communication with other survivor enclaves, and an apparent lack of progress in the experiments have already caused loss of cohesion among the scientists and soldiers.  Dr. Logan (Richard Liberty), the lead scientist on the project, has been secretly using the recently deceased soldiers in his experiments, trying to prove his theory that the zombies can eventually be domesticated.

Many of the living have fled to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, where a feudal-like government has taken hold. Paul Kaufman (Dennis Hopper) rules the city with overwhelming firepower. "Big Daddy" (Eugene Clark), an unusually intelligent zombie, directs his fellow zombies to use firearms against the human defenses, and later leads the zombies in an assault on the human city, with the result that the electric fence that kept the zombies out now keeps the humans trapped inside.

Taking place during the initial outbreak of a zombie pandemic, Diary of the Dead follows a band of film students making a horror movie who decide to record the events in documentary-style as they are chased down by zombies.

Taking place shortly after the events of Diary of the Dead, the film follows the actions of former Colonel and current Sergeant "Nicotine" Crockett (Alan van Sprang). After a failed raid, Crockett deserts his post with fellow soldiers Kenny (Eric Woolfe), Francisco (Stefano Colacitti), and Tomboy (Athena Karkanis). The group encounters an island run by two families who are feuding over whether zombies should be kept alive or killed.

The story focuses on zombie prisoners that race cars in a modern-day Coliseum for the entertainment of wealthy humans. Matt Birman was set to direct the film from a script he co-wrote with George Romero.[3] It is one of Romero's four unproduced screenplays that Birman hopes to produce.[4] As of December 2020, it remains in development hell.[5]

Following the release of Diary of the Dead (2007) and Survival of the Dead (2009), Twilight of the Dead was conceived by George A. Romero as the concluding instalment to his Living Dead zombie film series.[6] Romero did not regard Diary and Survival as part of the overarching narrative from Night of the Living Dead (1968), Dawn of the Dead (1978), Day of the Dead (1985) and Land of the Dead (2005), and saw the fate of the zombies following Land of the Dead as an unresolved narrative element.[6] Romero co-wrote a film treatment for the film with screenwriter Paolo Zelati, which was to be set on a tropical island in a decimated world where life has all but disappeared, and follow the last humans on Earth who are caught between factions of the undead, but Romero died from lung cancer in 2017.[6][7]

In 2021, Romero’s widow Suzanne Romero revived the project and oversaw the completion of the screenplay, with screenwriters Joe Knetter and Robert L. Lucas joining Zelati to finish the script,[6] which would follow a woman and child who are the last human survivors as they search for safety on a once idyllic island now overtaken by nature and the undead.[8] The writers watched archive videos of George A. Romero coming up with the original treatment as reference when creating the script.[6] Suzanne Romero remained closely involved throughout the development process to ensure the film aligned with her late husband's vision,[6] and sought to maintain the social commentary elements his previous Living Dead films were known for.[7] Suzanne told The Hollywood Reporter, "This is the film he wanted to make. And while someone else will carry the torch as the director, it is very much a George A. Romero film."[6]

The Machinist (2004) director Brad Anderson joined the project as director in 2023, describing Romero’s original films as a major influence on his work and expressing a desire for Twilight of the Dead to continue the series’ blend of horror with social commentary and humanistic themes.[9] Twilight of the Dead is produced by Suzanne Romero, John Baldecchi, Sarah Donnelly, Paolo Zelati, and Stephanie Caleb of Ardvella Entertainment. Executive producers include Dominic Ianno, Alex Dundas, Jason Resnick, Chris Roe, and Luis Riefkohl.[7]

In November 2024, Betty Gabriel and Milla Jovovich were announced to have been cast in the lead roles.[10] Meanwhile, frequent Romero collaborators Greg Nicotero and his KNB EFX Group, who began their careers with Romero's Day of the Dead (1985), were announced to lead the prosthetic makeup effects.[10] By the end of 2023, the script was completed, and the George A. Romero estate partnered with Los Angeles based financier-producer Roundtable Entertainment, with a planned late 2023 start date in Puerto Rico; however, production was delayed by the 2023 SAG-AFTRA strike.[7] Production began filming in  Puerto Rico on March 6th 2025,[11][12] and wrapped in April.[13] Fortitude International launched sales for Twilight of the Dead at the American Film Market, partnering with Roundtable Entertainment to secure distribution for the film worldwide.[14] In October 2025, Nicotero stated the film was securing additional financing, and that the film would depict a continued evolution of the zombies.[15]

List indicators:

Craig Henighan, Jill Purdy, Nathan Robitaille
