Northeastern Pennsylvania (NEPA or Nepa; sometimes pronounced /ˈniːpɑː/ NEE-pah) is a region of the U.S. state of Pennsylvania that includes the Pocono Mountains, the Endless Mountains, and the industrial cities of Scranton (the area's largest city), Wilkes-Barre, Pittston, Hazleton, Nanticoke, and Carbondale. A portion of this region is located in the New York City metropolitan area. Recently, Pennsylvania tourism boards have described Northeastern Pennsylvania as Upstate Pennsylvania.[1]

Unlike most other parts of the Rust Belt, some of the communities are experiencing a modest population increase, and others, including Monroe and Pike counties, rank among the state's fastest growing counties.[2]

Northeastern Pennsylvania borders the Pennsylvania Wilds to the west, the New York State Southern Tier and Hudson Valley regions to the north and northeast, Sussex and Warren counties in New Jersey to the east, and the Lehigh Valley to the south.

References to Northeastern Pennsylvania frequently include some combination of Bradford County, Carbon County, Columbia County, Lackawanna County, Luzerne County, Monroe County, Montour County, Northumberland County, Pike County, Schuylkill County, Sullivan County, Susquehanna County, Wayne County, and Wyoming County.

 Green: the largest county by area;
 Yellow: the most populous county

Northeastern Pennsylvania is home to PNC Field in Moosic, which hosts the Scranton/Wilkes-Barre RailRiders, the AAA affiliate to Major League Baseball's New York Yankees. Mohegan Sun Arena at Casey Plaza in Wilkes-Barre hosts the American Hockey League's Wilkes-Barre/Scranton Penguins; it previously hosted the Wilkes-Barre/Scranton Pioneers of arena football.

Pocono Raceway in Long Pond holds one cup series NASCAR race annually.

Mohegan Pennsylvania in Plains was Pennsylvania's first casino to offer slots. Mount Airy Casino Resort in Mount Pocono also offers gambling.

Skiers can find several slopes in the area, including Shawnee on Delaware in East Stroudsburg, Blue Mountain Resort (east of Palmerton), Montage Mountain Ski Resort in Scranton, which also operates as a water park during the summer season, Elk Mountain in Union Dale, and Camelback Mountain Resort in Tannersville. Like Montage, it operates as a water park in the off season.

There are several attractions that explore the region's industrial history. Eckley Miners' Village near Hazleton, and the Lackawanna Coal Mine Tour in Scranton highlight the area's coal mining history, while Steamtown National Historic Site and the Electric City Trolley Museum, both in Scranton, focus on transportation history.

The Houdini Museum in Scranton[3] follows Houdini's exploits in the area, as well as the rest of the world. The Scranton Ghost Walk attraction tells of Scranton's paranormal history.[4]  1433 N. Main Avenue, home of the longest running seance event in the United States, "Haunted! Mysteries of the Beyond", was picked by the Pennsylvania Department of tourism as one of the most haunted places in the state.[5]

Many well-known universities are located in Northeastern Pennsylvania. Penn State operates campuses in the Wilkes-Barre area, near Scranton and in Hazleton. Colleges in the Scranton area include Marywood University in Dunmore, Lackawanna College in downtown Scranton, and the University of Scranton, in downtown Scranton. Geisinger Commonwealth School of Medicine is the region's only medical school and specifically recruits students from NEPA and surrounding counties.

Wilkes-Barre area colleges include Wilkes University in downtown Wilkes-Barre, King's College also in downtown Wilkes-Barre, Luzerne County Community College in Nanticoke, and Misericordia University in Dallas.

Keystone College in La Plume, St. Tikhon's Orthodox Theological Seminary in South Canaan Township, Clarks Summit University (formerly Baptist Bible College & Seminary) in Clarks Summit, Bloomsburg University in Bloomsburg, and East Stroudsburg University in East Stroudsburg are among the other colleges in the area.

Three college preparatory schools are located in Northeastern Pennsylvania, including Wyoming Seminary in Kingston, Scranton Preparatory School in Scranton, and MMI Preparatory School in Freeland.

Seven Catholic high schools are located in Northeastern Pennsylvania. They include Holy Cross High School in Dunmore, which primarily serves Lackawanna County, Luzerne County, Wayne County, Pike County, Susquehanna County, Wyoming County, and Monroe County. The second school is Holy Redeemer High School in Wilkes-Barre, which serves primarily Luzerne County and Wyoming County. The third school is Notre Dame High School, which is located in Stroudsburg. It primarily serves Monroe County. The fourth school is Nativity BVM High School, which is located in Pottsville, which serves Schuylkill County. 
The fifth school is Marian Catholic High School in Tamaqua, which serves Schuylkill County, as well as Luzerne County and Carbon County. The sixth school is Our Lady of Lourdes Regional School, which is located near the city of Shamokin. The seventh school is St. Gregory the Great Academy, which is a boarding school for boys grades 9–12, specializing in classical education, and located in Elmhurst Township.
