Striking Distance is a 1993 American action thriller film starring Bruce Willis as Pittsburgh Police homicide detective Thomas Hardy. The film co-stars Sarah Jessica Parker, Dennis Farina, and Tom Sizemore. It was directed by Rowdy Herrington and written by Herrington and Marty Kaplan.  The film was shot on location throughout Pittsburgh; its early title was Three Rivers.

Pittsburgh homicide detective Thomas Hardy turns in his partner and cousin, Jimmy Detillo, for using excessive force, which in turn causes him to become alienated by the majority of his fellow officers. Thomas and his father, Vincent, later receive a call indicating that the Polish Hill Strangler, a serial killer who Tommy believes is an officer, was spotted driving nearby. As Tom and Vince pursue the killer, their vehicles collide and roll down an embankment. After regaining consciousness, Tom learns that Vince was shot dead and the killer escaped. Police arrest criminal Douglas Kesser as the Strangler. Later, Jimmy jumps off the 31st Street Bridge; his body is never located.

Two years later, an alcoholic Tom has been reassigned to the River Rescue Squad. He was demoted after telling a reporter that he believed the Strangler was a policeman. Called to the scene of a body dump, Tom finds the victim is an ex-girlfriend. He is assigned a new partner, Jo Christman. After a nurse is abducted, Tom receives a call similar to the ones left by the Strangler. Detective Eddie Eiler, who holds a grudge against Tom for testifying against Jimmy, states on TV the murder was committed by a copycat. Tom is met with opposition by his uncle, Captain Nick Detillo, after suggesting that the Strangler returned. Tom steals the Strangler file from the precinct to conduct an unauthorized investigation. The body of another of Tom's ex-girlfriends is later found.

Tom is invited to the Policemen's Ball by Jo, where a tussle occurs between Tom and the hostile officers. Jo takes Tom home where they proceed to have sex while being observed by an unseen person.

The next morning, Tom and Jo stumble upon someone dumping what appears to be a wrapped body off a bridge. Tom destroys the suspect's car with a flare gun, but the unidentified individual escapes on foot. Divers retrieve the bundle only to find it merely a group of rugs. Tom and Jo are humiliated by their peers. Later that night in bed, the lovers share their suspicions that the killer dumped the rugs to discredit them. Jo then confesses that she was previously married and now has a four-year-old daughter. 

Meanwhile, Eiler informs Nick that he suspects Tom of the murders. Nick discloses that Tom has been under scrutiny by Internal Affairs. During a court hearing to have Tom removed from the force, it is revealed that Jo's real name is Emily Harper, a Pennsylvania State Police investigator probing Tom for evidence of misconduct. Emily perjures herself, and Tom goes free.

That evening, Emily is kidnapped while Tom finds the body of another victim (this time a coworker from River Rescue) outside his houseboat. Thinking that Jimmy's brother Danny has been committing the murders out of revenge, Tom heads upriver to the Detillo family cabin. Just as Danny arrives, someone tases Tom unconscious. Tom awakens to find himself, Danny, and Emily handcuffed to chairs. The killer turns out to be Jimmy, who survived the fall into the river. Jimmy is about to kill Emily when Nick walks in and tells Jimmy to turn himself in. It was revealed two years back, Nick arrived at the crash site, confronted the killer, and was horrified to find it was Jimmy. Jimmy begged Nick to let him go, which he did. Vince pried himself out of the wreckage and aimed at the fleeing killer, unaware that it was Jimmy. Nick tried to stop him and, in the ensuing struggle, accidentally shot Vince dead.

Jimmy shoots Nick and fights with Danny, giving Tom a chance to free himself. As the police close in, Jimmy flees in Tom's motorboat with Tom in pursuit. The two fight and fall into the Ohio River, where Tom kills Jimmy with the taser. Tom is later reinstated as a detective and visits Vince's grave with Emily and her daughter Sarah, putting a wreath on it.

The film was cited as one of the many troubled projects during the time Sony Pictures was run by Jon Peters and Peter Guber. It took a huge amount of resources to merely break even.

Filming took 13 weeks in the summer of 1992 in Pittsburgh. The working title was Three Rivers, and it was scheduled for release on May 21, 1993. But after the original cut performed poorly with test audiences, extensive reshoots were done in Los Angeles, with story changes and removal of some plot points. Because of this, the release date was pushed from May to Sept. 17.[2]
According to articles and reports at the time, test audiences were unimpressed with the initial cut of the film largely allegedly because they found parts of it confusing. Those parts were added into director Rowdy Herrington's and Marty Kaplan's original script by star Willis. One source claimed the original cut was like "Hudson Hawk without the laughs."[3]

One of the veteran production members said that Willis "called the shots like he did on '(Hudson) Hawk' and like he used to do on Moonlighting. He had scenes rewritten. He did what he wanted to do. We were working with Orson Willis."[3]

When news about reshoots was reported, Columbia's then-current chairman Mark Canton said in an interview that he "couldn't be more enthusiastic" about the film, predicting it would be a "beyond-sizable hit". But in order to do so, the movie had to make a $30 million-plus profit at the box office. Canton was known for being heavily involved in several other films in earlier years that had very troubled productions and received negative receptions from audiences during test screenings. Those include Wes Craven's sci-fi horror film Deadly Friend, one of Willis's earlier box office flops The Bonfire of the Vanities, and John McTiernan's Last Action Hero. Just as he did with Striking Distance, Canton kept the news and rumors about problems on sets of those films and negative responses from test audiences from the public and demanded heavy changes on the films, which only ended up making matters worse.

In Striking Distance's case, for example, all the love/intimate scenes between Hardy and Jo were re-shot to make them sexier. Several dialogue scenes, such as the scene in the bar between Willis and Sizemore, were also cut to make the film's pace quicker. The change in tone made Columbia change the title from Three Rivers to Striking Distance, as it now focused more on the action/thriller elements. Although his interference in the script and huge ego during filming caused problems with the production and the original cut, Willis was still very angry because he had to return for re-shoots, so much so that he blamed Herrington for it, despite the fact that Herrington defended Willis in interviews regarding problems with the film. According to cast and crew, Willis treated Herrington very poorly during both initial filming and re-shoots.[3]

Striking Distance opened at number one at the US box office with a gross of $8,705,808 but only went on to gross a total of $24 million.[4][5] Internationally it did better, including a number one opening in France, grossing $53 million for a worldwide total of $77 million[1] on a budget of $30 million.[6]

On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 20% based on 25 reviews. The site's consensus states: "Weighed down by a rote story and passionless performances, Striking Distance represents one of the lesser '90s genre outings from action hero Bruce Willis."[7] On Metacritic it has a score of 36% based on reviews from 25 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews".[8] Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B" on an A+ to F scale.[9]

Roger Ebert rated the film one and a half out of four stars, criticizing the film's cliches (even listing them individually) and stating: "The credits say 'written by Rowdy Herrington and Martin Kaplan,' but the right word would have been 'anthologized'."[10] Owen Gleiberman called the film a "flat, dankly lit, grindingly inept thriller about a serial killer whose victims all turn out to have been acquaintances of Willis' rumpled, alcoholic cop hero."[11]
