Troy Hill is a neighborhood on Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania's North Side.  It has a zip code of 15212, and has representation on Pittsburgh City Council by the council member for District 1.

Troy Hill sits on a plateau above the Allegheny River. It is approximately 3 kilometers (1.9 mi) long from Vinial Street to the end of Lowrie Street and only 1 kilometer (0.62 mi) wide from Wicklines Lane to Herrs Island.

Troy Hill was originally part of the Reserve Tract laid out by surveyor and Pennsylvania Vice-President David Redick in 1788. Incorporated in 1833 as the village of New Troy, it was settled by German immigrants who worked in the mills, tanneries, breweries, and railroads that lined the Allegheny River. The migration up to Troy Hill began when a Catholic church opened a small cemetery in 1842. By 1866 one hundred families were officially Troy Hill residents. The adjacent riverfront land along with Herr's Island would in 1849 be incorporated into the short-lived Duquesne borough (distinct from the modern borough of the same name), that in 1868 was partitioned, the portion upriver of the northern end of Herr's Island becoming part of the newly-formed borough of Millvale, while the downriver portion including the island was annexed to the City of Allegheny as its 8th ward. The upland including the village of Troy Hill was also annexed, forming part of the 7th ward, and following an 1877 redistricting became the city's 13th ward. When Allegheny was annexed by Pittsburgh in 1907, most of its 8th and 13th wards became Pittsburgh's 24th ward, roughly corresponding to the modern Troy Hill neighborhood.

Troy Hill is home to six historic landmarks: the Troy Hill Firehouse, Saint Anthony's Chapel, the Rectory of Most Holy Name of Jesus, the Troy Hill Incline Building, the Allegheny Reservoir Wall, and the Ober-Guehl house.

In the 1830s, Troy Hill's population escalated significantly, resulting in the need of a school. In 1836, a 1-room brick school house was built in "New Troy" and named Mount Troy School #1, because at the time it was located in Reserve Township. It was sold in 1860, which then was replaced by a new, 2 room brick school house. A decade after the civil war, the pupils increased to around 200, so 2 more rooms were added in 1874. Troy Hill was now part of Allegheny's School System, and in 1883 the school was demolished and a new one was built in its place. That building was then also replaced by the Troy Hill School of 1907, but then was shut down in 1960 and demolished. The site of the original school is now a community park.[2]

Until 1959 the neighborhood was served by the 4 Troy Hill trolley operated by Pittsburgh Railways.[3]


Beginning in 2013, Evan Mirapaul, an art collector living in Troy Hill, commissioned two whole-house installations in the neighborhood. Both La Hutte Royal, created by German artist Thorsten Brinkmann, and Kunzhaus, by Polish artist Robert Kusmirowski, are free to tour by appointment.[4] In 2019 a third house was proposed by Lenka Clayton and Phillip Andrew Lewis. After years of working on it, Darkhouse Lighthouse was opened to the public in September of 2022.[5] Lenka Clayton and Phillip Andrew Lewis also created an independent project in Troy Hill called Gallery Closed, opened in 2021 and is "closed 24/7 open 24/7" as the work appears through two windows of the historic Troy Hill Incline Building.[6] February 2024 - April 2025 seven artists collaborate with the owners of Gallery Closed to create Exhibition Copy, a rotating series of solo shows. Each artist is invited to respond to the idea of the exhibition copy as Gallery Closed is multiplied into adjacent homes and businesses along a half-mile length of Lowrie Street. [7]
While "Troy Hill" generally refers to the historically German neighborhood atop the Troy Hill plateau, the neighborhood's boundaries also encompass the narrow and flat river plain that sits between the plateau and the Allegheny River, formerly part of the Borough of Duquesne. As of 2011[update], this river plain is dominated by Pennsylvania Route 28, an expressway which begins at East Ohio Street and then follows the river north.  But before Route 28 became an expressway, this plain was a Croatian neighborhood that was settled by immigrants from Jastrebarsko, who called the neighborhood "Mala Jaska" and founded St. Nicholas Parish,[9][10] and "Bohemian Hill" to the Southwest.

Several Hollywood films have scenes filmed in Troy Hill, including Hoffa (1992),[11] Innocent Blood (1992),[11] Striking Distance (1993),[12] and Adventureland (2009).[12]

Troy Hill has five borders including the Pittsburgh neighborhoods of Spring Garden to the north and northwest, East Allegheny to the west, and North Shore to the southwest as well as Reserve Township to the north-northwest and the borough of Millvale to the northeast.  Troy Hill is also adjacent to the Strip District across the Allegheny River with a direct link via 31st Street Bridge.

The Troy Hill neighborhood has 11 distinct flights of city steps, many of which are open and in a safe condition. In Troy Hill, the Steps of Pittsburgh quickly connect pedestrians to public transportation and the East Ohio Street trail.[13]
