UPMC Events Center is an indoor arena located in the Pittsburgh suburb of Moon, Pennsylvania as a part of Robert Morris University, replacing the old Charles L. Sewall Center.[6]  The UPMC Events Center is the new home of the Robert Morris Colonials men's and women's (NCAA) Division I basketball and women's volleyball teams.[7] The UPMC Events Center was originally scheduled to open in January 2019.[8][1] However, it later opened in May 2019 after the men's basketball team announced all of their 2018–19 games would be played at the North Athletic Complex on campus.

In 2013, a survey was conducted to see if a new sporting and athletic center would be wanted for the university and in 2016, the survey results concluded in an overwhelming favor for the construction of a new sports center.

Bob Dylan and Pierce the Veil are the only acts that have performed at the arena more than once.

The UPMC Events Center offers a state-of-the-art freeweight and aerobic exercising rooms used for weightlifting and fitness classes.  There are also two more rooms that offer sports such as: yoga and wellness programs for students; as well as space for training recreational sports such as: basketball, volleyball and indoor soccer.[9][10]  This facility is also fitted with locker rooms, private showering areas, office space and private lockers for the three (NCAA) Division I teams: men's and women's basketball and women's volleyball.

The facilities in this sports center are also used as a venue for conventions, public speakers, expos, concerts, and graduation ceremonies.[11]

On March 21, 2019, it was announced that the first basketball game to be held at the arena would be played between Robert Morris and the Pittsburgh Panthers on November 12. This was the 31st matchup between the two teams, with Pitt having won all 30 previous meetings, all of which had been held at Pitt's Petersen Events Center or Fitzgerald Field House. Pitt won the game 71-57 in front of a sold-out crowd. The arena hosted its first conference championship game on March 10, 2020 when the Colonials defeated the St. Francis Red Flash to win the Northeast Conference title, also played before a sold-out crowd of over 4,000. The attendance record, previously jointly held by the aforementioned two games, was broken on March 6, 2025, when 4,058 fans saw RMU defeat the Wright State Raiders in the quarterfinals of the Horizon League tournament.[12]
