Education City is an educational and research hub located in Al Rayyan Municipality in the Doha Metropolitan Area of Qatar.[2] Developed by the Qatar Foundation, it was established by Moza bint Nasser, one of the consorts of Qatar's former ruler Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani and the current ruler's mother,[3] to advance education, research, and innovation in the region. Spanning 12 square kilometres (4.6 sq mi), the property houses various educational facilities, including satellite campuses of eight international universities.

Education City was launched by Qatar Foundation in 1997. The same year, Virginia Commonwealth University became the first institute to establish itself on its campus.[4] The city was officially inaugurated in 2003.[5]

Over the past 20 years, Education City has grown from a single school to a multi university campus with students from over 50 countries and an enormous research fund, offering significant opportunities for the advancement of knowledge and research across a variety of disciplines.[6]

Initially planned as a single university, Education City evolved into a partnership with international institutions tailored to Qatar’s needs.[7]

Education City is home to the following local Qatar university and six U.S. satellite universities, one British satellite university, and one French satellite university:

Other educational centers located at Education City include:

Several centers based at Education City focus on science and research. These include:

Doha Metro: Three separate stations of the Doha Metro's Green Line (also known as the Education Line) serve Education City: the Education City station, the Qatar National Library station, and the Al Shaqab station. All three stations were opened to the public on 10 December 2019.[13]

Education City Tram:[14] The Education City Tram is a sustainable transport system offering free rides within the campus. The tram has three lines: Yellow, Blue, and Green. The Yellow and Blue Lines serve the South Campus, while the Green Line connects the North Campus. This innovative system is designed to enhance connectivity and reduce the campus's carbon footprint.

Bus Service:[15] Education City features a bus service with frequent stops across different service routes to ensure convenient access to all areas of the campus.

American universities which have established campuses in Education City have been the subject of ongoing criticism of whether it is appropriate to maintain a campus in Qatar, given the alleged Qatari links to state-sponsored terrorism, the lack of freedom of speech in the country and the country's absolute monarchy. In an interview with Gulf News Journal, Herbert London, president of the London Center for Policy Research and a senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute, said "universities I think have compromised themselves" by having campuses in a country like Qatar where academic freedom and freedom of the press are severely limited.[16]

25°18′54″N 51°26′03″E﻿ / ﻿25.31500°N 51.43417°E﻿ / 25.31500; 51.43417
