The battle of Morlaix was fought in Brittany on 30 September 1342 between an Anglo-Breton army under William, Earl of Northampton, and a far larger Franco-Breton force led by Charles of Blois (pictured). England and France, fighting the Hundred Years' War since 1337, had each sided with a faction in the Breton Civil War. The English had prepared a defensive position and when the first of three French divisions advanced it was shot to pieces by English archers using longbows. The second division, of men-at-arms, attacked but their charge was halted when they fell into a camouflaged ditch. Presented with a large, close-range target the English archers inflicted many casualties. The English then withdrew into a wood to their rear, which the French besieged, possibly for several days, before Northampton broke out with a night attack. This was the first major land battle of the Hundred Years' War and the tactics used foreshadowed those of both the French and the English for the rest of the 1340s. (Full article...)

September 30: National Day for Truth and Reconciliation in Canada; Martyrs' Day in China

Child labor in the United States was a common phenomenon across the economy in the 19th century, gradually declining in the early 20th century, with exceptions in the Southern textile and related industries and agriculture. Compulsory school laws and Northern state laws prohibiting work in mines and factories further reduced the phenomenon. A national law was passed in 1916, but it was overturned by the Supreme Court in 1918; a 1919 law was also overturned. In the 1920s, an effort to pass a constitutional amendment failed, because of opposition from the South and from Catholics. Outside of farming, child labor was steadily declining in the 20th century, and the New Deal in 1938 finally ended child labor in factories and mines. Child labor has always been a factor in agriculture, and that continues into the 21st century. There has been a large rise in child labor in the 2020s amid a labor shortage due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and some states have proposed or enacted measures to loosen restrictions. This 1910 photograph by Lewis Hine shows ten-year-old Rose Biodo of Philadelphia carrying berries in a field in Browns Mills, New Jersey, four weeks into the school year.

Photograph credit: Lewis Hine
Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer projects:

This Wikipedia is written in English. Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below.
