Penn State Greater Allegheny (PSUGA) is a commonwealth campus of the Pennsylvania State University that sits on the border of McKeesport and White Oak in Pennsylvania.

As early as 1934, the Pennsylvania State College has offered technical courses in the Pittsburgh and McKeesport region to train industry workers for the booming technology and steel industries surrounding Pittsburgh.[1] In 1948, the Penn State McKeesport Center opened in Dravosburg, offering courses in occupational training and self-enrichment for returning veterans. The center eventually moved to McKeesport in 1952 and established complete associate degree programs with the first graduates in 1955.

Also in 1955, a group of area businessmen formed the Penn State McKeesport Advisory Board whose purpose was to search for a permanent location for the McKeesport Center. In 1957, the current location was obtained and the main building was constructed. Since then, Penn State Greater Allegheny continues to play a large role in educating the population of the Greater Pittsburgh area.

Originally Penn State McKeesport, the Penn State Board of Trustees initially voted to rename the campus to Penn State Greater Allegheny during its September 2006 meeting.[2] The board subsequently approved the current name in January 2007.[3]

Penn State Greater Allegheny offers a number of two- and four-year degree programs that students can start and finish on the campus. Penn State Greater Allegheny also offers a 3+1 program in energy engineering; students spend three years at Greater Allegheny, and transition to University Park for the fourth year to complete the program.

Nearly all of Penn State's 275+ baccalaureate degree programs can be started at Penn State Greater Allegheny. Students may complete their first two years at Greater Allegheny before transitioning to a different Penn State campus to complete their studies.  Approximately 60% of all Penn State students enter the university through the 2+2 plan.

Penn State Greater Allegheny offers an honors program which has many benefits such as early class registration, special library privileges, small class sizes and advanced research projects. Students that are a part of this program may earn honors credits by taking honors courses, participating in honors options or pursuing independent studies.

Admission to the honors program is by invitation and based on quality of academic performance as well as experiences outside of the classroom. Eligible incoming first year students will receive a letter of invitation during the admission process. For current students, the invitation is made by the Honors Committee at the end of each academic year.

Each honors student must meet the set requirements each year to remain a part of the program. Generally, a student must maintain a 3.33 GPA, complete at least one honors course each semester and participate in activities sponsored by the honors program.[5]

Penn State Greater Allegheny is a residential campus, offering housing for 200 students in McKeesport Hall.[6]

Penn State Greater Allegheny offers many different varsity sports including[7] baseball, men's and women's basketball, men's and women's soccer, softball, women's volleyball, men's and women's cross country, and track and field.

For students interested in playing a sport but not wanting to join a varsity team, various intramural leagues and activities are held throughout the academic year. Some of these intramural sports include flag football, indoor soccer, and men's and women's volleyball.

A new fitness center was constructed at Penn State Greater Allegheny in the spring of 2005. The fitness center is located next to McKeesport Hall and contains a variety of fitness equipment. Some of the equipment includes: treadmills, exercise bikes, ellipticals, free weights and weight machines.

40°20′43″N 79°49′33″W﻿ / ﻿40.345244°N 79.825941°W﻿ / 40.345244; -79.825941
