What are the Sunday hours of the Pittsburgh Symphony?
Who is the top employer in Pittsburgh?
When is the upcoming ABBA concert?
What is the region's largest heritage festival?
What is the motto of Carnegie Mellon University?
What major park borders the CMU campus?
Which U.S. president visited Carnegie Mellon in 2008 to give a speech?
What year was the Software Engineering Institute established at CMU?
Which school at CMU is known for drama and the arts?
How many Super Bowl titles have the Pittsburgh Steelers won?
What annual Pittsburgh event celebrates Irish heritage?
In what year did Pittsburgh host the G20 summit?
Which Pittsburgh company is famous for ketchup?
What is the name of the Pittsburgh NBA G League team?
What famous inventor of the polio vaccine worked at the University of Pittsburgh?
Which Pittsburgh university was founded by Andrew Carnegie?
Which Pittsburgh-born playwright wrote “Fences”?
What is the name of Pittsburgh’s international airport?
Which Pittsburgh medical center is one of the largest hospital systems in the U.S.?
Which Pittsburgh landmark is known as “The Point”?
What year was the University of Pittsburgh founded?
What Pittsburgh neighborhood is home to the Cathedral of Learning?
What was the first building constructed on CMU’s campus?
What research center at CMU focuses on cybersecurity?
What year did the Mellon Institute merge into CMU?
What is the name of the Pittsburgh NHL hockey team?
What Pittsburgh bridge is painted bright yellow and named after a famous baseball player?
Which university’s basketball team is called the Panthers?
Which Pittsburgh film festival celebrates independent cinema?
Which famous zombie filmmaker studied in Pittsburgh?
Which Pittsburgh neighborhood is home to CMU and Pitt?
What two rivers meet to form the Ohio River?
What is the tallest building in Pittsburgh?
What iconic Pittsburgh sandwich is topped with French fries and coleslaw?
In what division does Pitt-Greensburg compete in athletically?
What is the Carnegie Mellon Tartans original fight song titled?
What is the Carnegie Mellon football fraternity called?
What famous machine learning venue had its first conference in Pittsburgh in 1980?
When is homecoming weekend for CMU125?
Where is the Untitled (Art Party) hosted?
What is CMU’s official mascot?
What student-run musical theater organization is famous at CMU?
What is the name of CMU’s student newspaper?
Which Pittsburgh-born composer wrote the music for “Mister Rogers’ Neighborhood”?
What CMU alum voiced the character Sid in the Ice Age movies?
Which Pittsburgh landmark is lit up with neon red sign that says “PITTSBURGH”?
When did construction to complete the Mon–Fayette Expressway toward Duquesne begin?
Which corridor from Pittsburgh to Uniontown is the project intended to relieve?
What unified number identifies the cross-state corridor serving the Pittsburgh region?
Which river does the Expressway Bridge cross on the approach to Pittsburgh?
Which agency maintains most of the tollway segments serving the Pittsburgh area?
After entering Pennsylvania, through which Fayette County township does the route first pass?
What is the name of the mainline toll plaza encountered near Fairchance?
In which township is the Redstone mainline toll gantry located?
Where is the Telegraph Road exit situated along the approach toward Pittsburgh?
Which state route briefly runs concurrent with the corridor near US 40 before splitting at a cloverleaf?
Which local road interchange provides connections to US 40 and PA 51 along the way?
Which side of Pittsburgh is the planned high-speed link designed to serve?
Which interstate to the west does the corridor aim to provide an alternative to for regional travel?
Which two interstates form the southern and planned northern connections related to Pittsburgh?
Which Pittsburgh television station is identified as the Fox affiliate?
Which three universities in Pittsburgh are listed together in the text?
What is the title of the famous CMU “Last Lecture” by Randy Pausch?
Which classic experiment illustrating wave–particle duality is referenced in the file?
Which principle in quantum mechanics limits simultaneous precision of position and momentum?
In chemistry, what are charged species formed by losing or gaining electrons called?
What is the championship game of the National Football League pursued by Pittsburgh’s NFL team?
Which early pro football player signed a $500 contract to face a Pittsburgh club?
Which Ivy League AAU founding member in Pennsylvania is mentioned (regional context to CMU)?
In which West Virginia county is Cheat Lake located at the southern terminus toward Pittsburgh?
Which interchange on the Uniontown bypass provides access to PA 21?
After crossing the Monongahela, which Washington County borough does the route enter?
Which town is bypassed to the west as the tollway continues north through woodland?
Which U.S. route joins the bypass west of Uniontown before later splitting northwest?
Which state agency maintains the short segment of the corridor in West Virginia?
What is the name of CMU’s computer science complex along Forbes Avenue?
Which CMU college is abbreviated “CIT” (also referred to as the College of Engineering)?
Which CMU college is abbreviated “DC” (Dietrich College of Humanities & Social Sciences)?
Which CMU college is named for H. John Heinz III?
In which Silicon Valley city is CMU’s West Coast campus located?
CMU’s West Coast campus is located inside which NASA facility?
In what Middle Eastern country is CMU’s branch campus at Education City?
In what year did CMU open its branch campus in Education City?
What is the name of the large urban park that borders CMU’s campus and contains Phipps Conservatory?
What is the name of the glasshouse and gardens in Oakland near CMU?
Which two Carnegie Museums share the historic building on Forbes Avenue in Oakland?
What is the official home ballpark of the Pittsburgh Pirates?
What is the street address of that ballpark?
What indoor arena is the home venue of the Pittsburgh Penguins?
What is the street address of that arena?
What National Historic Landmark park sits at the tip of Pittsburgh’s “Golden Triangle”?
According to the 2020 U.S. Census, approximately how many people live in the City of Pittsburgh?
What is the three-digit telephone area code most associated with Pittsburgh?
What riverside trail system offers about 33 miles of urban paths through Pittsburgh and Allegheny County?
What famed museum on the North Shore houses the world’s largest collection of Warhol art and archives?
What history museum in the Strip District is Pennsylvania’s largest and an affiliate of the Smithsonian Institution?
