In what year did Pittsburgh host the G20 summit?
What number can I call for Carnegie Museum / Carnegie Museum of Art Theater? Format your answer as one number.
Which Pittsburgh neighborhood is home to CMU and Pitt?
What day will Ben Folds return to pittsburgh to play with the Pittsburgh Symphony?
After entering Pennsylvania, through which Fayette County township does the route first pass?
What is the area at the center of campus in Carnegie Mellon known as? This place is also home to The Fence at CMU.
What indoor arena is the home venue of the Pittsburgh Penguins?
What is Pittsburgh most similar to in terms of annual percent average possible sunshine received?
Which state agency maintains the short segment of the corridor in West Virginia?
What famous machine learning venue had its first conference in Pittsburgh in 1980?
What is the championship game of the National Football League pursued by Pittsburgh’s NFL team?
Which university’s basketball team is called the Panthers?
When was "Examining the American Peace Movement Prior to World War I" written?
From which university will a new program bring med students to the University of Pittsburgh?
What is the name of the large urban park that borders CMU’s campus and contains Phipps Conservatory?
Which Ivy League AAU founding member in Pennsylvania is mentioned (regional context to CMU)?
In which hall is the College's Office of the Dean housed in?
In 2024, how many Carnegie Mellon graduate programs ranked in the top 10 nationwide?
In which Silicon Valley city is CMU’s West Coast campus located?
When is the upcoming ABBA concert?
Which town is bypassed to the west as the tollway continues north through woodland?
After World War II, what was the name of the civic revitalization project that Pittsburgh began?
What is the name of the Pittsburgh NHL hockey team?
In what year did Carnegie Science Center enter the Carnegie Museums?
How many Super Bowl titles have the Pittsburgh Steelers won?
In what year did Pittsburgh's Nickelodeon introduce the moving picture theater?
In 1883, Carnegie bought which rival of his own company?
What famous inventor of the polio vaccine worked at the University of Pittsburgh?
In which West Virginia county is Cheat Lake located at the southern terminus toward Pittsburgh?
Which interstate to the west does the corridor aim to provide an alternative to for regional travel?
Which river does the Expressway Bridge cross on the approach to Pittsburgh?
In what year was The Management Game first introduced by CMU?
What riverside trail system offers about 33 miles of urban paths through Pittsburgh and Allegheny County?
In what year did Virginia and Pennsylvania come to an agreement on their mutual borders?
Who invented the first micro electro mechanical system?
Which Pittsburgh company is famous for ketchup?
In which township is the Redstone mainline toll gantry located?
Where was Mark Cuban born?
Who told the Madwoman to be on her way?
Which interstate numbers (three of them) roughly form a triangular-shaped beltway with Interstate 68 and 80? Write your answer as comma separated values in increasing order.
In 2001, Heinz Field and PNC Park replaced what stadium?
Where is the Telegraph Road exit situated along the approach toward Pittsburgh?
At what age did the director of August Wilson's Cycle pass?
