What are the Sunday hours of the Pittsburgh Symphony?
Who is the top employer in Pittsburgh?
When is the upcoming ABBA concert?
What is the region's largest heritage festival?
What is the motto of Carnegie Mellon University?
What major park borders the CMU campus?
Which U.S. president visited Carnegie Mellon in 2008 to give a speech?
What year was the Software Engineering Institute established at CMU?
Which school at CMU is known for drama and the arts?
How many Super Bowl titles have the Pittsburgh Steelers won?
What annual Pittsburgh event celebrates Irish heritage?
In what year did Pittsburgh host the G20 summit?
Which Pittsburgh company is famous for ketchup?
What is the name of the Pittsburgh NBA G League team?
What famous inventor of the polio vaccine worked at the University of Pittsburgh?
Which Pittsburgh university was founded by Andrew Carnegie?
Which Pittsburgh-born playwright wrote “Fences”?
What is the name of Pittsburgh’s international airport?
Which Pittsburgh medical center is one of the largest hospital systems in the U.S.?
Which Pittsburgh landmark is known as “The Point”?
What year was the University of Pittsburgh founded?
What Pittsburgh neighborhood is home to the Cathedral of Learning?
What was the first building constructed on CMU’s campus?
What research center at CMU focuses on cybersecurity?
What year did the Mellon Institute merge into CMU?
What is the name of the Pittsburgh NHL hockey team?
What Pittsburgh bridge is painted bright yellow and named after a famous baseball player?
Which university’s basketball team is called the Panthers?
Which Pittsburgh film festival celebrates independent cinema?
Which famous zombie filmmaker studied in Pittsburgh?
Which Pittsburgh neighborhood is home to CMU and Pitt?
What two rivers meet to form the Ohio River?
What is the tallest building in Pittsburgh?
What iconic Pittsburgh sandwich is topped with French fries and coleslaw?
In what division does Pitt-Greensburg compete in athletically?
What is the Carnegie Mellon Tartans original fight song titled?
What is the Carnegie Mellon football fraternity called?
What famous machine learning venue had its first conference in Pittsburgh in 1980?
When is homecoming weekend for CMU125?
Where is the Untitled (Art Party) hosted?
What is CMU’s official mascot?
What student-run musical theater organization is famous at CMU?
What is the name of CMU’s student newspaper?
Which Pittsburgh-born composer wrote the music for “Mister Rogers’ Neighborhood”?
What CMU alum voiced the character Sid in the Ice Age movies?
Which Pittsburgh landmark is lit up with neon red sign that says “PITTSBURGH”?
