At what age did the director of August Wilson's Cycle pass?
Carnegie is buried only a few yards away from who?
In 2023, the PIttsburgh City Council approved an increase to the police budget by what dollar amount?
What was the name of the general that took command in 1777 of Fort Pitt?
What is the area at the center of campus in Carnegie Mellon known as? This place is also home to The Fence at CMU.
What date does the RV Fall Show start in 2025?
Who invented the first micro electro mechanical system?
The Pittsburgh Triangles played tennis where?
The Gene Kelly Awards honors students in what study / major?
From which university will a new program bring med students to the University of Pittsburgh?
Which batman movie was filmed at Carnegie mellon?
What does the tradition of sliding or stepping on the former home plate of Forbes Field signify?
In 1946, who was hired by Carnegie Institute of Technology to restart the school's economics department?
What time is The Steel City Spooky Market happening?
In what year was The Management Game first introduced by CMU?
Who was the chancellor of University of Pittsburgh from 1995 to 2014?
In what year did Carnegie Science Center enter the Carnegie Museums?
In 2001, Heinz Field and PNC Park replaced what stadium?
Who told the Madwoman to be on her way?
Who is UPitt's 18th chancellor?
What is the largest non-government employer in Allegnheny County?
In what year did Pittsburgh's Nickelodeon introduce the moving picture theater?
How many visitors does Station Square attract?
The Steelers have been owned by which family since the team's founding in 1933?
Who was the first rector of Trinity Episcopal Church of Pittsburgh?
In what year did Virginia and Pennsylvania come to an agreement on their mutual borders?
Before Mike Tomlin, who was the head coach of football at UPitt?
In 1883, Carnegie bought which rival of his own company?
Are gift memberships at Carnegie Museums transferable? Answer yes or no.
By 1850, what was another nicknmame for Pittsburgh?
Where was Mark Cuban born?
After World War II, what was the name of the civic revitalization project that Pittsburgh began?
Did Carnegie oppose the annexation of the Hawaiian islands?
What percentage of steel was produced in Pittsburgh by war's end?
What day will Ben Folds return to pittsburgh to play with the Pittsburgh Symphony?
In 2024, how many Carnegie Mellon graduate programs ranked in the top 10 nationwide?
What is the main stage acts on Cedarville exclusively?
What number can I call for Carnegie Museum / Carnegie Museum of Art Theater? Format your answer as one number.
In which hall is the College's Office of the Dean housed in?
What is Pittsburgh most similar to in terms of annual percent average possible sunshine received?
What kind of method did Carnegie encourage in terms of investigation of the various causes of war?
Which interstate numbers (three of them) roughly form a triangular-shaped beltway with Interstate 68 and 80? Write your answer as comma separated values in increasing order.
When was "Examining the American Peace Movement Prior to World War I" written?
What year was the Carnegie Mellon School of Computer Science established?
Scott made it possible for Carnegie to invest what dollar amount into Adams Express Company?
Pittsburgh was transformed into a liberal stronghold of what group?
Kamin Science Center attracts nearly how many visitors each year?
Squirrel Hill is home to approximately how many synagogues?
Raj Reddy holds what chair at the School of Computer Science at CMU?
Night of the Living Dead, produced in 1968, was made by who?