At what dollar amount threshold is gift documentation generally required?
How many Nobel laureates does Caltech have?
What is the phone number of Capital Program PA Museum and Historical?
What prompted the cancellation of the 2004-2005 NHL season?
Photography has existed for about how many years before the war broke out?
What was the original construction costs for The School of Medicine?
On what date did Warhol model with jazz musician Miles Davis?
Which new policy at Yale University allows for students on a leave of absence to participate in extracurricular clubs and visit campus?
Since 2005, Arizona has produced how many NBA draft picks?
Galton and Pearson founded which journal?
How old was Darius Welch when he reportedly robbed two women at gunpoint on Merwyn Avenue?
Who asserted that economists now recognize that such a sharp distinction [between intra-firm and interfirm transaction] does not exist?
Name one government organization which conducts the tests on the Wireless Emergency Alert. You should only name one organization. Appreviations are fine.
Sirens of Titan (1959) features which species invading the Earth?
Can I search for a full time permanent job at CMU while working in a TES position?
Who wrote the first version of Godspell as his master's thesis at CMU?
As of what date will Twitter block URLs in tweets that point to external websites containing malicious content?
Cindy Yen graduated with double degrees in music and what other degree?
Pete Henry and who else has been elected to the College Football hall of Fame?
Zakharia et al. in 2009 found a similar proportion of what ancestry in African American DNA samples?
Israel Institute of Technology in Haifa won a competition for rights to claim free city land and what dollar amount in subsidies?
Savannah and Carolinas Campaigns was published in 1985 and reissued in what year?
In what year was Twitter sued by the widow of a man killed in the Amman shooting attack?
What is the official Civil Rights enforcement agency for the City of Pittsburgh?
As of 2022, what percent of US black population were immigrants?
What dollar amount was allocated by Governor Ed Rendell for the Authority?
What building is the current home of the Cultural Studies, Fiml Studies, and Gender, Sexuality, and Women's studies programs?
What percentage of households fall below the poverty threshold at one point in time?
In June 16, 2021, how many people did Darryl Jones honor?
Victoria defeated Quebec in challenge games, but was their win officially recognized? Answer yes or no.
Who said "elitist is not in our DNA"?
N/A
Conlon lead how many seasons as head coach?
Bond University was founded / established in what year?
Holon announced that the vehicle is the world's first what built to automotive standard?
On what date of August will local law enforcement and first responders receive invaluable training from the DOD?
Naval Flight Officers usually serve a how many year commitment?
Dress tartans are inspired by what women in the 17th and 18th centuries?
After how many days is the final return due after the discontinuation of business?
Who was the lyricist who confronted his shattered self confidence in Sardi's bar?
Who was the Lady Symon Building named after?
Who challenged the widespread belief that homosexuality is a pathology?
Flannery O'Connor wrote what type of writing?
As of 2010, how many trees were planted on Aldrich Park
What is the ceremonial mace of UNSW Syndey made of?
In 2006, Chestnut hill announced the acquisition of what property?
Who said "Make sure you're taking care of yourself. We see people at the best moments..."
Sea of Reeds for Freed Trio was composed by who?
In what state was the largest refracting telescope in the world located?
Can liquor be given to a person under the age of twenty-one if it is consumed in the minimal amount for a religious service?