Reaching this goal, Kotick then set Activision on his second promise to investors,
to develop high-demand games and make the company profitable by 1997. [31] Activision
published the first-person perspective MechWarrior in 1989, based on FASA's pen-and-paper
game BattleTech. A sequel, MechWarrior 2, was released in 1995 after two years of
delays and internal struggles, prompting FASA not to renew their licensing deal with
Activision. To counter, Activision released several more games bearing the MechWarrior
2 name, which did not violate their licensing agreement. These included NetMech, MechWarrior
2: Ghost Bear's Legacy, and MechWarrior 2: Mercenaries. The entire MechWarrior 2 game
series accounted for more than US$70 million in sales. Activision procured the license
to another pen-and-paper-based war game, Heavy Gear, in 1997. The video game version
was well received by critics, with an 81. 46% average rating on GameRankings and being
considered the best game of the genre at the time by GameSpot. The Mechwarrior 2 engine
was also used in other Activision games, including 1997's Interstate '76 and 1998's
Battlezone. With several of its own successfully developed games helping to turn a
profit, Kotick led Activision to start seeking acquisitions of video game development
studios, guided by market surveys to determine what areas of content to focus on.
[33] It is estimated that between 1997 and 2008, Activision made 25 acquisitions,
several for undisclosed amounts. Several of these came prior to 2001, in the midst
of the Dot-com bubble, enabling the company to acquire studios at a lower valuation.
[33] On June 16, 2000, Activision reorganized as a holding company, Activision Holdings,
to manage Activision and its subsidiaries more effectively. [36] Activision changed
its corporate name from "Activision, Inc. " to "Activision Publishing, Inc. ", while
Activision Holdings took Activision's former "Activision, Inc. " name. [36] Activision
Publishing became a wholly owned subsidiary of Activision, which in turn became the
publicly traded company, with all outstanding shares of capital stock converted. [36][37]
Some of the key acquisitions and investments made by Activision in this period include:
While Activision was highly successful with its range of developers and successful
series, Kotick was concerned that they did not have a title for the growing massively
multiplayer online market, which presented the opportunity for continued revenues
from subscription models and microtransactions instead of the revenue from a single
sale. Around 2006, Kotick contacted Jean-Bernard Lévy, the new CEO of Vivendi, a French
media conglomerate. Vivendi had a games division, Vivendi Games, that was struggling
to be viable at the time, but its principal feature was that it owned Blizzard Entertainment
and its highly successful World of Warcraft game, which was drawing in $1. 1 billion
a year in subscription fees. Vivendi Games also owned Sierra Entertainment. [17] Lévy
recognized Kotick wanted control of World of Warcraft, and offered to allow the companies
to merge, but only if Lévy held the majority shares in the merged group, forcing Kotick