internal job seekers via text messages to your mobile device ("Mobile Messenger Service").
This service is optional and only used for staff recruitment purposes. You must opt-in
to receive SMS-based messages. If you are interested in opting into SMS messaging
before you apply to a position : On the job posting, under Related Links on the right
side under Job Details, click SMS Opt-In . Scroll down to the Channel section and
click SMS . To opt-in, click the checkbox and confirm the phone number is your mobile
number. If not, you will have to update your contact details to include one. See the
Update Your Contact Details Quick Guide [pdf] for more information. Click OK then
click Done . The automated SMS will be sent to your mobile number. Confirm your opt-in
by replying " YES" to the automated SMS message. You can also opt-in to receive text
messages via Personal Information > Contact Information or My Account > Change Preferences
. Apply for a Job Click the Apply button to access the internal job application and
apply to the position. The information found in the sections within Application Details
is automatically pulled from your Career Profile in Workday. Note: Any changes made
to these sections in the application (i. e. , job history, education, experience)
can flow back to your Career Profile in Workday. Check the "Replace Experience information
in my profile with this information" below the application section where you made
an update. See Career Profile and Related Tools System Guide [pdf] as an additional
resource. Attach your resume and other job application documents, such as a cover
letter, to the Resume/Cover Letter section by clicking the Select Files button or
by dragging and dropping files into the gray box. Answer the application questions.
When you are ready to submit your application, click Submit . You will receive a message
confirming your submission. Click View Details to view the application details. Manage
Your Job Applications View Applications You can view the status and details of your
job application in the Recent Applications section of the Jobs Hub. Click View Application
to view a single job application or View All Applications to see details for all applied
jobs. The My Applications report displays the following information: Submitted Date:
The date you applied to the position Job Title: The position title Job Requisition:
The job requisition number and title Application Status: The current status of your
application. Potential application statuses include: Application Received: Your application
is under review. No Longer in Consideration: You are no longer being considered for
this opportunity. Process Completed: The position has been filled. You were not selected.
Selected: You were hired for the position. Application Received: Your application
is under review. No Longer in Consideration: You are no longer being considered for
this opportunity. Process Completed: The position has been filled. You were not selected.
Selected: You were hired for the position. Supervisory Organization: The supervisory