the departments of Architecture, Civil, Geo and Environmental Engineering, Electrical
and Computer Engineering and the Schools of Management, Governance, Education are
located here. The TUM School of Medicine is located at the site of its university
hospital, the Rechts der Isar Hospital, in the district of Haidhausen. The TUM Department
of Sport and Health Sciences is located in the Olympiapark, the former site of the
1972 Summer Olympics. The campus in Garching, located around 10 km north of Munich,
has grown to become the largest TUM campus. In the last decades, the departments of
Physics, Chemistry, Mechanical Engineering, Informatics and Mathematics have all relocated
from their former buildings in the Main Campus. They have since been joined by numerous
research institutes, including the Max Planck Institutes for Plasma Physics, Astrophysics,
Extraterrestrial Physics and Quantum Optics, the Forschungsreaktor München II (FRM
II), the headquarters of the European Southern Observatory (ESO), and the Leibniz
Supercomputing Centre, one of the fastest supercomputers in Europe. [9] A landmark
of the Garching campus is the Oskar von Miller Tower, a meteorological measurement
tower with a height of 62 m. The Garching campus is connected to Munich by the Autobahn
and the Munich U-Bahn. It has its own fire department. The third TUM campus is located
35 km north of Munich in Weihenstephan, Freising. It hosts the School of Life Sciences.
Additional TUM facilities are located in Ottobrunn (Department of Aerospace and Geodesy),
[10] Straubing, [11] Heilbronn, [12] and Singapore. TUM operates a subsidiary in Singapore.
In 2001, the German Institute of Science and Technology (GIST) – TUM Asia was founded
in partnership with the National University of Singapore and the Nanyang Technological
University, offering a range of Master's programs. In 2010, TUM Asia started offering
bachelor's degrees in collaboration with the Singapore Institute of Technology. In
2010, TUM and the Nanyang Technological University founded TUMCREATE, a research platform
for the improvement of Singapore's public transportation. [13] As a technical university,
the university specializes in engineering, technology, medicine, and the applied and
natural sciences. Compared to a Volluniversität (a universal university), it lacks
the Geisteswissenschaften, including law and many branches of the social sciences.
As of 2025, the Technical University of Munich is organized into seven schools: [14]
Other institutions include the Rechts der Isar Hospital, the TUM Graduate School and
the Munich School of Politics and Public Policy. The TUM School of Management is triple
accredited by the European Quality Improvement System (EQUIS), the Association to
Advance Collegiate Schools of Business (AACSB) and the Association of MBAs (AMBA).
[15][16][17] The Technical University of Munich is one of the most research-focused
universities in Europe. This claim is supported by relevant rankings, such as the
funding ranking of the German Research Foundation and the research ranking of the
Centre for Higher Education. [18] Under the German Universities Excellence Initiative,
TUM has obtained funding for multiple research clusters, including e-conversion (energy
technology), MCQST (quantum mechanics), ORIGINS (astrophysics, biophysics and particle