The athletic nickname, or equivalently athletic moniker, of a university or college
within the United States and Canada is the name officially adopted by that institution
for at least the members of its athletic teams. Typically as a matter of engendering
school spirit, the institution either officially or unofficially uses this moniker
of the institution's athletic teams also as a nickname to refer to people associated
with the institution, especially its current students, but also often its alumni,
its faculty, and its administration as well. This practice at the university and college
tertiary higher-education level has proven so popular that it extended to the high
school secondary-education level in the United States and Canada and even to the primary-education
level as well. In the United States and Canada, multiple recurring themes have appeared
over time for choosing a school's athletic nickname. In almost all cases, the institution
chooses an athletic nickname with an overtly positive goal in mind, where that goal
reflects the character of the institution—either a previously established characteristic
or a characteristic hoped for as a goal henceforth. Often by choosing an abstract
concept as its athletic moniker, the institution wants to inspire its student-athletes
on and off the field to achieve success that the abstract concept represents. Examples:
Cornell Big Red, Stanford Cardinal, UIC Flames, Tulane Green Wave. Often by choosing
an animal, the school wants to emphasize the instillation of fear of losing athletic
competitions to the institution's teams, such as through an especially fierce or stealthy
animal. When the school chooses an animal as its athletic nickname, usually in the
plural or as a collective noun for a group of that animal, then typically, the school
has that animal (in the singular) as its mascot, [1] either specifically named with
a proper noun or generically referred to without a proper noun. Examples: Michigan
Wolverines, Oregon Ducks, Princeton Tigers, Iowa Hawkeyes, California Golden Bears,
Minnesota Golden Gophers, Texas Longhorns and the Bowling Green Falcons. Often by
choosing a collection that represents a summary of the institution's students or of
its history. Such a collection may refer to an ethnicity; a profession; religious
designation, such as saints; or other groupings of people. A portion of athletic monikers
that fall into this collection category started originally as derogatory epithets
from others, but as an act of defiance, the school embraced the term as a rallying