Jane Harman, at that time a member of Congress from California. At the end of 2010,
Newsweek merged with the online publication The Daily Beast, following extensive negotiations
between the respective proprietors. Tina Brown, The Daily Beast's editor-in-chief,
became editor of both publications. The new entity, The Newsweek Daily Beast Company,
was 50% owned by IAC/InterActiveCorp and 50% by Harman. [9][10][33] Newsweek was redesigned
in March 2011. [34] The new Newsweek moved the "Perspectives" section to the front
of the magazine, where it served as a summary of the past week's news reported on
by The Daily Beast. More room was made available in the front of the magazine for
columnists, editors, and special guests. A new "News Gallery" section featured two-page
spreads of photographs from the week with a brief article accompanying each one. The
"NewsBeast" section featured short articles, a brief interview with a newsmaker, and
several graphs and charts for quick reading in the style of The Daily Beast. This
is where the Newsweek staple "Conventional Wisdom" was located. Brown retained Newsweek's
focus on in-depth, analytical features and original reporting on politics and world
affairs, as well as a new focus on longer fashion and pop culture features. A larger
culture section named "Omnivore" featured art, music, books, film, theater, food,
travel, and television, including a weekly "Books" and "Want" section. The back page
was reserved for a "My Favorite Mistake" column written by celebrity guest columnists
about a mistake they made that helped shape who they are. [34] On July 25, 2012, the
company operating Newsweek indicated the publication was likely to go digital to cover
its losses and could undergo other changes by the next year. Barry Diller, chairman
of the conglomerate IAC/InterActiveCorp, said his firm was looking at options since
its partner in the Newsweek/Daily Beast operation had pulled out. [35] At the end
of 2012, the company discontinued the American print edition after 80 years of publication,
citing the increasing difficulty of maintaining a paper weekly magazine in the face
of declining advertising and subscription revenues and increasing costs for print
production and distribution. [36] The online edition was renamed Newsweek Global.
[37] In April 2013, IAC chairman and founder Barry Diller said at the Milken Global
Conference that he "wished he hadn't bought" Newsweek because his company had lost
money on the magazine and called the purchase a "mistake" and a "fool's errand". [38]
On August 3, 2013, IBT Media acquired Newsweek from IAC on terms that were not disclosed;
the acquisition included the Newsweek brand and its online publication but did not
include The Daily Beast. [11] On March 7, 2014, IBT Media relaunched a print edition
of Newsweek[39] with a cover story on the alleged creator of Bitcoin that was criticized
for lacking substantive evidence. The magazine stood by its story. [40] IBT Media
announced that the publication returned to profitability on October 8, 2014. [41]
In February 2017, IBT Media appointed Matt McAllester, then editor of Newsweek International,