was an assistant coach for eight years at the university. [110][better source needed]
In May 2020, the university entered into a settlement and agreed to pay $40. 9 million
to the sexual abuse survivors. [111] The Ohio Union was the first student union built
by an American public university. [80] It is dedicated to the enrichment of the student
experience, on and off the university campus. The first Ohio Union, on the south edge
of the South Oval, was constructed in 1909 and was later renamed Enarson Hall. The
second Ohio Union was completed in 1950 and was prominently along High Street, southeast
of the Oval. It was a center of student life for more than 50 years, providing facilities
for student activities, organizations and events, and serving as an important meeting
place for campus and community interaction. The union also housed many student services
and programs, along with dining and recreational facilities. The second Ohio Union
was demolished in February 2007 to make way for the new Ohio Union, which was finished
in 2010. During this time, student activities were relocated to Ohio Stadium and other
academic buildings. [112] The university has over 1, 000 student organizations; intercollegiate,
club and recreational sports programs; student media organizations and publications,
fraternities and sororities; and three student governments. Student organizations
at Ohio State provide students with opportunities to get involved in a wide variety
of interest areas including academic, social, religious, artistic, service-based,
diversity and many more. There are over 1, 000 registered student organizations that
involve many thousands of students. [113] The university's forensics team has won
the state National Forensics Association tournament several times. [114] Block "O"
is currently the largest student-run organization on the campus of Ohio State. With
over 2, 400 annual members, Block "O" serves as the official student cheering section
at athletic events for the university. According to the Student Organization Office
in the Ohio Union, Agricultural Education Society is the oldest student organization
on campus. The Men's Glee Club often disputes the claim, but after consultation with
Ohio Union Staff, Agricultural Education Society was named as the university's oldest
organization. Each year, students may sign up to participate in BuckeyeThon, Ohio
State's student-led philanthropy. The organization hosts events throughout the year
to support the hematology/oncology/bone marrow transplant unit[115] at Nationwide
Children's Hospital in Columbus. [116] Each February, thousands of students and community
members attend BuckeyeThon's signature event, a Dance Marathon consisting of two separate
12-hour shifts. In the past 15 years, students have raised over $5 million to support
treatment, research, and various therapies at the hospital. [117] Unique to BuckeyeThon
is the use of an operational fund separate from the main philanthropic cancer fund.
As a registered non-profit, BuckeyeThon is subject to university audit and issues
gift receipts through the Foundation. [118] Ohio State has several student-managed
publications and media outlets. The Makio is the official yearbook. [119] The Makio's
sales plummeted by 60% during the early 1970s; the organization went bankrupt and