its tropical and sub-tropical climates, Great Barrier Reef, and numerous beaches,
tourism is also important to the state's economy. Queensland was one of the largest
regions of pre-colonial Aboriginal population in Australia. [13] The Aboriginal ownership
of Queensland is thought to predate 50, 000 BC, and early migrants are believed to
have arrived via boat or land bridge across Torres Strait. Through time, their descendants
developed into more than 90 different language and cultural groups. During the last
ice age, Queensland's landscape became more arid and largely desolate, making food
and other supplies scarce. The people developed the world's first seed-grinding technology.
[14] The end of the glacial period brought about a warming climate, making the land
more hospitable. It brought high rainfall along the eastern coast, stimulating the
growth of the state's tropical rainforests. [15] The Torres Strait Islands is home
to the Torres Strait Islander peoples. Torres Strait Islanders are ethnically and
culturally distinct from mainland Aboriginal peoples. They have a long history of
interaction with both Aboriginal peoples of what is now Australia and the peoples
of New Guinea. In February 1606, Dutch navigator Willem Janszoon landed near the site
of what is now Weipa, on the western shore of Cape York. This was the first recorded
landing of a European in Australia, and it also marked the first reported contact
between Europeans and the Aboriginal people of Australia. [15] The region was also
explored by French and Spanish explorers (commanded by Louis Antoine de Bougainville
and Luís Vaez de Torres, respectively) before the arrival of Lieutenant James Cook
in 1770. Cook claimed the east coast under instruction from King George III of the
Kingdom of Great Britain on 22 August 1770 at Possession Island, naming eastern Australia,
including Queensland, New South Wales. [16] The Aboriginal population declined significantly
after a smallpox epidemic during the late 18th century and massacres by the European
settlers. [17][page needed] In 1823, John Oxley, a British explorer, sailed north
from what is now Sydney to scout possible penal colony sites in Gladstone (then Port
Curtis) and Moreton Bay. At Moreton Bay, he found the Brisbane River. He returned
in 1824 and established a penal settlement at what is now Redcliffe. The settlement,
initially known as Edenglassie, was then transferred to the current location of the
Brisbane city centre. Edmund Lockyer discovered outcrops of coal along the banks of
the upper Brisbane River in 1825. [18] In 1839 transportation of convicts was ceased,
culminating in the closure of the Brisbane penal settlement. In 1842 free settlement,
which had already commenced, was officially permitted. In 1847, the Port of Maryborough
was opened as a wool port. While most early immigrants came from New South Wales,
the first free immigrant ship to arrive in Moreton Bay from Europe was the Artemisia,
in 1848. Earlier than this immigrant ship was the arrival of the Irish famine orphan
girls to Queensland. Devised by the then British Secretary of State for the Colonies,