colleges, community colleges into four-year colleges, awarding baccalaureate degrees,
sometimes while still a community college, and colleges into universities, with graduate
(post-baccalaureate) programs. In Bangladesh, three-year undergraduate programs are
known as Degree (Pass) courses and four-year undergraduate programs are known as Honours
courses. [7] In Hong Kong, the English system is followed. Students sit for the Certificate
of Education examinations at around sixteen years of age, and the Advanced-level,
or A-level examinations at around eighteen, then follow by three years of undergraduate
education, except for a few specific fields, such as medicine, nursing and law. This
is due to be changed, with five-year secondary education and two-year matriculation
examination combined and shortened to six years matriculation, and undergraduate education
lengthened to four years. Students may be able to receive general education in their
first years in universities, more akin to the North American system. The first batch
of students under the new system will enter universities in 2012. Alternatives are
undergraduate certificates or diplomas, with some equivalent to associate degree in
educational level. India's higher education system is the third largest in the world,
next to the United States and China. The main governing body at the tertiary level
is the University Grants Commission (UGC), which enforces its standards, advises the
government, and helps coordinate between the centre and the state. Accreditation for
higher learning is overseen by 15 autonomous institutions established by the UGC.
In India, the graduation system is classified into two parts: Undergraduate (UG) and
Postgraduate (PG). It takes three or four years to complete an undergraduate degree.
The three-year undergraduate programs are mostly in the fields of arts, commerce,
science etc. , and the four-year programs are mostly in the fields of technology,
engineering, pharmaceutical sciences, agriculture etc. However, for medicine, law
and architecture, the period has been five years. [8] The possessor of the first UG
is referred to as graduate and that of the PG degree as post-graduate. [9][10] Other
than UG and PG there are various 1 to 2 year diploma courses available. Indian higher
education system has expanded at a fast pace by adding nearly 20, 000 colleges and
more than 8 million students in a decade from 2000–01 to 2010–11. As of 2020, India
has over 1000 universities, with a break up of 54 central universities, 416 state
universities, 125 deemed universities, 361 private universities, 7 Institute under
State Legislature Act, and 159 Institutes of National Importance which include IIMs,
AIIMS, IITs, IIITs, IISERs and NITs among others. Other institutions include 52, 627
colleges as government degree colleges, private colleges, standalone institutes and
post-graduate research institutions, functioning under these universities as reported
by the MHRD in 2020. Colleges may be Autonomous, i. e. empowered to examine their
own degrees, up to PhD level in some cases, or non-autonomous, in which case their
examinations are under the supervision of the university to which they are affiliated;
in either case, however, degrees are awarded in the name of the university rather