A cèilidh (/ˈkeɪli/ KAY-lee, Scottish Gaelic: [ˈkʲʰeːlɪ]) or céilí (Irish: [ˈceːlʲiː])
is a traditional Scottish and Irish social gathering. In its most basic form, it simply
means a social visit. In contemporary usage, it usually involves dancing and playing
Gaelic folk music, either at a home or a larger concert at a social hall or other
community gathering place. Cèilidhean (plural of cèilidh) and céilithe (plural of
céilí) originated in the Gaelic areas of Scotland and Ireland and are consequently
common in the Scottish and Irish diasporas. They are similar to the troyl traditions
in Cornwall and twmpath and noson lawen events in Wales, merry neets in Cumbria and
North East England, as well as English country dance throughout England which have
in some areas undergone a fusion with céilithe. The term is derived from the Old Irish
céle (singular) meaning 'companion'. It later became céilidh and céilidhe, which means
'visit' in Gaelic. [1] In Scottish Gaelic reformed spelling it is spelt cèilidh (plural
cèilidhean) and in Irish reformed spelling as céilí (plural céilithe). Originally,
a cèilidh was a social gathering of any sort, and did not necessarily involve dancing:
The 'ceilidh' is a literary entertainment where stories and tales, poems and ballads,
are rehearsed and recited, and songs are sung, conundrums are put, proverbs are quoted,
and many other literary matters are related and discussed — Carmichael, Alexander,
Carmina Gadelica, 1900, tome I, p. xxviii. [2] The ceilidh of the Western Hebrides
corresponds to the veillée of Lower Brittany . .. and to similar story-telling festivals
which formerly flourished among all the Celtic peoples — Wentz, W. Y. Evans, The Fairy-faith
in Celtic countries, Oxford University Press, 1911, p. 32. On long, dark winter nights
it is still the custom in small villages for friends to collect in a house and hold
what they call a "ceilidh" (pronounced kay'lee). Young and old are entertained by
the reciters of old poems and legendary stories which deal with ancient beliefs, the
doings of traditional heroes and heroines, and so on. Some sing old and new songs
set to old music or new music composed in the manner of the old. — Mackenzie, Donald
A. , Wonder Tales from Scottish Myth and Legend, 1917, p. 14. [3] In recent decades,
the dancing portion of the event has usurped the older meanings of the term, though