out of which 28. 8% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 46. 7% were married couples living together, 9. 1% had a female householder with no husband present, and 41. 1% were non-families. 32. 6% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9. 2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2. 41 and the average family size was 3. 12. In the city, the population was spread out, with 27. 3% under the age of 20, 9. 0% from 18 to 24, 29. 8% from 25 to 45, 23. 8% from 45 to 64, and 10. 2% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 33 years. For every 100 females, there were 95. 4 males. The median income for a household in the city was $58, 662, and the median income for a family was $81, 166. Males had a median income of $56, 597 versus $39, 190 for females. The per capita income for the city was $32, 672. About 5. 7% of families and 11. 0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 12. 6% of those under age 18 and 6. 3% of those age 65 or over. Bloomington is home to State Farm Insurance, [26] Country Financial, Illinois Agricultural Association, and Beer Nuts. [27] The original Steak 'n Shake restaurant was opened in Normal, Bloomington's adjoining city, in 1934. [28] It also has the largest Dairy Queen restaurant in the United States. [29] According to Bloomington's 2018 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the area's top employers are: Bloomington is also home to a convention center at the McLean County Fairgrounds and Grossinger Motors Arena. Bloomington is the only town where Beer Nuts brand snacks are made. There are two Beer Nuts company stores in Bloomington, each offering a video tour of the Bloomington plant and history of Beer Nuts. [30] Eastland Mall is the main shopping center in Bloomington. [31] Bloomington-Normal ranks competitively in Richard Florida's creativity rankings. Most noteworthy is Bloomington-Normal's creative class share of the workforce, which resulted in a No. 1 rating for Bloomington-Normal's creativity rank. [32] The Bloomington Center for the Performing Arts is the centerpiece of the city's Cultural District, which also includes the neighboring McLean County of Arts Center, forthcoming festival park, and creativity center for arts education. The center is also home to over twenty area performing arts ensembles. More than 400 performances and community events take place at the Bloomington Center for the Performing Arts each year. [33] The Illinois Symphony Orchestra performs at the Bloomington Center for the Performing Arts, where it gives five Masterworks concerts, two Pops concerts, and three Chamber Orchestra concerts annually. [34] The McLean County Arts Center is one of the oldest arts organizations in the Midwest, serving Central Illinois for over 130 years. Each year 12 art exhibitions are held, including the Holiday Treasurers exposition and sale, and the annual Amateur Competition and Exhibition which, for over 70 years, has showcased the best amateur artists in Central Illinois. The Arts Center also sponsors a number of community events, such as the Sugar Creek Arts Festival in Uptown Normal and the Spring Bloom Arts Festival in Bloomington. [35] The Community Players Theater, on Robinhood Lane off of Towanda Avenue, is one of the oldest community theaters completely staffed by volunteers. Opened in 1923, it celebrated its 88th season in 2011. [36] The Castle Theatre first opened in 1916 as a 1, 000-seat theater, created by the legendary theater builders Balaban & Katz, original inventors of the classic movie palace. For decades, the property served as one of the area's premier destinations. The Castle was restored to its former glory with a $1. 5 million renovation. It presents live music, corporate, public and private events. [37] The Illinois Wesleyan University School of Theatre Arts houses its talent within the Jerome Mirza Theatre at McPherson Hall. Four main stage plays are performed here annually, selected from a playbill including everything from Shakespeare to musicals. McPherson Hall, completed in 1963, is named for IWU's 10th president, Harry W. McPherson, and contains a 300-seat theater, scene shop, classrooms and other facilities. [38] The Illinois Wesleyan University Westbrook Auditorium serves approximately 200 music majors and several hundred IWU students each year. Several musical performances of all style periods are featured each semester, and most concerts are free with general seating. [39] The Miller Park Outdoor Summer Theatre, an amateur theater group sponsored by the City of Bloomington, performs two major theater productions each year. [40] USA Ballet is an international ballet company. It provides children's workshops and outreach programs, and presents at Illinois Wesleyan University's McPherson Theatre three times a year. [41] American Passion Play was the oldest continuously performed Passion Play in the United States. Performed each spring at the Bloomington Center for the Performing Arts, the Passion Play was set in Palestine and portrays the life of Christ in its entirety, closing finally after its 100th year running in May 2023. [42][43] The Illinois Shakespeare Festival includes productions performed in an open-air, Elizabethan-style theatre within historic Ewing Manor each summer. The audience is encouraged to picnic on the grounds before each performance to be entertained by strolling Madrigal singers, jesters, and other entertainers as well as a Green Show performance. [44] The Lincoln's Bloomington Festival is held each July in Downtown Bloomington and features Civil War reenactments, traditional craft demonstrations, children's activities, musical performances, talks and tours. [45] The Spring Bloom Arts Festival is hosted by the McLean County Arts Center in March each year. This indoor fine art festival features over 100 artists representing a wide range of media including woodworking, glass art, sculpture, paintings, prints, photographs and handcrafted jewelry. [46] The McLean County Fair is billed as the '"Home of the World's Largest County 4-H Fair"[47] taking place each August at the McLean County Fairgrounds in Bloomington. 4-H activities include: livestock shows, a film festival, and exhibits around food, nutrition and health, plant science, engineering and technology, and environment and natural resources. Evening Grandstand Entertainment features tractor pulls and various musical acts. Ewing Manor was designed by Bloomington architect Phil Hooten in the Channel-Norman style favored by the affluent in the post-Victorian period. The surrounding gardens were created by noted landscape architect Jens Jensen, who also designed Springfield's Lincoln Memorial Gardens. The theatre on the grounds play host to the Illinois Shakespeare Festival each summer. [48] The McLean County Museum of History traces its roots back to 1892, the year the McLean County Historical Society was founded. Housed inside the old McLean County Courthouse, the museum features permanent and rotating exhibits that explore the history of Central Illinois. This location is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. [48] The Miller Park Pavilion & War Memorial was restored in 1977 and dedicated in May 1988. The black granite memorial is surrounded by red sidewalks that list the names of Central Illinois residents killed or missing in action in the Korean and Vietnam battles. [48] The Prairie Aviation Museum has a collection of preserved aircraft on display, including a Bell Sea