foothills (genres: metal, punk, alternative, hip-hop, R&B, gospel, rock, pop-rock, folk, jazz, country, and possibly others), concert rooms and clubs (Véčko, Bizarre, Christiania, City Club, Stromoradie, Za siedmimi oknami, Wave, Ester rock club, Netopier, Staré Mexiko, Insomnia, Ponorka, ENCORE), rock shows of bands with a long tradition (Rocková liga, vyše 20. ročníkov, Prešovský študentský Liverpool, 6. ročníkov, Rebrík) but also festivals (Sigortus, Dobrý festival, (t)urbanfest, ImROCK FEST, East Side Music Festival, Festival zlej hudby, Farfest, Jazz Prešov). Important events include the Dni mesta Prešov (Days of the City of Prešov), which are held annually on the occasion of the celebrations of the first written mention of the city (as of 2021[update], 774th anniversary). The celebrations usually include open-air concerts right in the center of Hlavná street, whereas several guests from the domestic and European alternative scene have taken turns throughout the years. That includes: Deti Picasso (Russia), Myster Möbius (France/Hungary), Masfél (Hungary), Prague Selection II. ; Laura a její tygři (Czech Republic), Srečna Mladina (Slovenia), Squartet (Italy), but also Slovak groups Heľenine Oči, Chiki liki tu-a, Arzén, Mango Molas, Alter Ego, Kapátske chrbáty, and Komajota. Part of the city's celebrations are also side stages, where young bands can also try their luck. In 2009, the first Prešov film festival, the Bastion film festival, was established. The festival takes place on the historic wall behind the Franciscan Church. The organizers are PKO Prešov and Prešov composer and guitarist David Kollar. After many years, the constant influx and modification of music groups, which are often enforced throughout Slovakia, required documentation, which took place through the internet database of Prešov bands and performers under the name Frenky's Music Encyclopedia. Historically and currently, the ever-growing database of Prešov musicians is run by Michal Frank, a journalist and editor-in-chief of the Prešov Korzár. Prominent Prešov musicians and bands: Prešov has the largest number of preserved castle ruins among all the regional towns in its vicinity, which led to the creation of the Prešov Castle Road project in 2019. The aim was to connect these castles with an imaginary tourist line and thus support the development of tourism in Prešov and its surroundings. 6 castles took part in the Prešov Castle Road project, namely: The construction of a central city park, situated between the Sekčov housing estate and Táborisko, is being prepared. [needs update? ] In addition to the planned central city park, there are several parks and parks in Prešov: Prešov is home to one professional football team: 1. FC Tatran Prešov which is the oldest football team in Slovakia. The city's ice hockey club is HC Prešov. The home arena of Prešov is the ICE Arena, and it has a capacity of 3600 visitors. Prešov had a hockey team since 1928 (HC Prešov Penguins), but in 2019 it folded. The city's handball club is HT Tatran Prešov, which is Slovakia's most popular and currently most successful club. The handball team of Prešov is taking part not only in the Slovak league (where it is dominating[needs update? ]), but also in the international SEHA League with the best handball teams from the region. Many handball players from this team are also members of the Slovak national handball team. The following industrial parks and industrial zones are located in Prešov: Prešov is connected by the D1 motorway to the south with Košice, to the west with Poprad and Ružomberok. The completion of its connecting sections enabling motorway connections to Bratislava and Žilina is expected in 2024. [needs update] A high-quality connection with Poland via Svidník and Hungary is to be provided by the R4 expressway. Today, Prešov has a southwestern motorway bypass, which has been under construction since 2017 and was officially opened on 28 October 2021. The southwestern bypass of Prešov forms part of the D1 motorway in the section Prešov – west and Prešov – south. Since 2019, the 1st stage of the northern bypass from the Prešov – West (Vydumanec) junction to the Prešov – North (Dúbrava) junction, which will be part of the R4 expressway, has been under construction. After the overall construction, the Prešov motorway bypass will bypass the whole city, divert transit traffic in all directions, and connect the D1 with the R4. It will start at D1 Prešov – South junction, continue towards the northwest, to the Prešov – West junction, where it will connect to the already completed parts of the D1 motorway. At this junction, the R4 will connect to D1. Completion of the construction of the 1st stage (PO west-PO north) of the northern bypass R4 is planned for the summer of 2023[needs update], and the 2nd stage (PO north-PO east) is now under the tender with planned opening in 2027. International routes of European importance E50 and E371, first-class roads I/18, I/68, and I/20, and second-class road 546 pass through Prešov. In 2017, the last stage of the so-called Embankment communication (Nábrežná komunikácia) was finished, including the reconstruction of the intersection at ZVL, which relieved the city center of transit traffic. Urban public transport is provided by the Transport Company of the City of Prešov (Dopravný podnik mesta Prešov, a. s. ), which operates a total of 45 regular public transport lines by the following means of transport: Today, the following vehicles are operated in MHD (Metská hromadná doprava – Public transport) Prešov: The history of public transport in Prešov began in 1949, when Local Transport was established, a municipal enterprise of the city of Prešov, as the operator of regular public transport in the territory of Prešov. After the end of World War II, it was not possible to start public transport with a new vehicle fleet, so an offer was accepted for the purchase of older Tatra vehicles from public transport facilities in Prague, Plzeň, and Bratislava. The vehicles were initially parked in the courtyard of the old prison on Konštantínova street, where the company was also located. On 4 September 1949, the traffic on the first lines was ceremoniously opened. Already in the first year of operation, the Prešov public transport buses went beyond the city limits to the municipalities of Šarišské Lúky, Nižná Šebastová, Haniska, and Solivar. The following year, the development of public transport continued with the introduction of additional bus lines. The state hospital, Záhrady, Sídlisko II, Budovateľská and Čapajevova street were all gradually connected to the public transport network in the 1950s, as well as other municipalities: the town of Veľký Šariš and its part Kanaš, Malý Šariš, Ľubotice, Fintice, Teriakovce and Záborské. In 1959, the first night line began operating, and the company was located on its own premises on Petrovanská street, where it moved in 1951. In 1958, when the construction of the trolleybus network in the city was approved, it brought a new stage in the development of urban transport. All high-capacity intra-city lines were to be electrified, while bus transport was to remain ancillary. Line 1 was the first to be electrified, which led from Nižná Šebastová through Šarišské Lúky to Solivar. Although its construction was delayed by several technical problems, on 13 May 1962, passengers got to experience trolleybuses. A new depot for trolleybuses and buses was completed in Šarišské Lúky, where the