Brisbane. [133] The campus has lecture theatres and syndicate rooms in the School of Business Building. The campus offers degrees in sciences, creative arts and media, business and commerce, engineering and built environment, education, health and community, information technology, humanities and communication, law and justice, English language programs, and pathway programs. There is a theatre, science laboratories, Olympic standard basketball courts, a 24 hour-access gym with high-tech equipment, a tennis centre, an aerobics centre, and netball courts at the Clive Berghofer Rec Center, social clubs, and other accommodation. It has the country's largest Japanese-designed garden (the Ju Raku En) and the Gumbi Gumbi gardens. [133] Three co-educational residential colleges located on this campus are McGregor, Steele Rudd, and Concannon. [134] [135] The university's Ipswich campus is located in the growing region of southeast Queensland, 40 minutes from the Brisbane CBD. The campus is home to the university's health programs, which has laboratories for clinical nursing students, custom-built training facilities for paramedicine students, café, gym, and different sports fields. The Ipswich campus offers degrees in nursing, paramedicine, psychology, and counselling as well as tertiary preparation programs. The campus also includes a library with a rainforest and water features designed to increase air quality and contribute to the learning environment. [12] The University of Queensland (UQ) Ipswich Campus was transferred to UniSQ on 7 January 2015 following an agreement between the two universities. The decision to transfer the Campus was motivated by a desire to increase tertiary education opportunities in the region and to reflect the strategic objectives of each university. [136] In stage two of the Sustainable Energy Solution project commenced in September 2017, 1198 solar panels were installed on building rooftops across campuses in Springfield and Ipswich, generating 586, 949 kilowatt hours and reducing thousands of tonnes of carbon emissions each year. [32] As of 31 May 2018, smoking is banned in all areas of the university. [137] The university's Springfield campus is located at Springfield, a suburb of approximately 30 kilometres (19 mi) southwest of Brisbane CBD, 1 hour from the Gold Coast, and about 20 minutes from Ipswich CBD. Springfield's public transportation includes bus services and a return train to Brisbane CBD. Serving as a hub for digital production and performance, the campus offers a range of undergraduate and postgraduate programs and includes a radio station, science and engineering laboratories, a television studio with spaces for rehearsal, collaborative teaching rooms, a fitness and recreation centre, an auditorium, and on-campus accommodation. The campus's flight simulator is helpful for aviation students to replicate both normal and abnormal scenarios of a flight with checks and procedures applied to airline pilots. Phoenix Radio at the Springfield campus is an online community radio station that serves the Greater Ipswich region and also provides training for students enrolled in the Bachelor of Applied Media program. [138] The university operates a study hub with study spaces, computers internet, and printers available. The hub is located within the Queensland College of Wine Tourism which is also owned and operated by the university. [139] See main article Mount Kent Observatory Closely located to the Ravensbourne National Park, the Ravensbourne Field Studies Centre is used by students and researchers in the School of Agriculture and Environmental Science to collect data and survey the natural environment. The centre has recently re-opened been after a decade of being vacant. [11] 27°36′15″S 151°55′55″E﻿ / ﻿27. 6042°S 151. 932°E﻿ / -27. 6042; 151. 932