The ACT (/eɪ siː tiː/ ⓘ; originally an abbreviation of American College Testing)[11]
is a standardized test used for college admissions in the United States. It is administered
by ACT, Inc. , a for-profit organization of the same name. [11] The ACT test covers
three academic skill areas: English, mathematics, and reading. It also offers optional
scientific reasoning and direct writing tests. It is accepted by many four-year colleges
and universities in the United States as well as more than 225 universities outside
of the U. S. The multiple-choice test sections of the ACT (all except the optional
writing test) are individually scored on a scale of 1–36. In addition, a composite
score consisting of the rounded whole number average of the scores for English, reading,
and math is provided. [12] The ACT was first introduced in November 1959 by University
of Iowa professor Everett Franklin Lindquist as a competitor to the Scholastic Aptitude
Test (SAT). [13] The ACT originally consisted of four tests: English, Mathematics,
Social Studies, and Natural Sciences. In 1989, however, the Social Studies test was
changed into a Reading section (which included a social sciences subsection), and
the Natural Sciences test was renamed the Science Reasoning test, with more emphasis
on problem-solving skills as opposed to memorizing scientific facts. [14] In February
2005, an optional Writing Test was added to the ACT. By the fall of 2017, computer-based
ACT tests were available for school-day testing in limited school districts of the
US, with greater availability expected in fall of 2018. [15] In July 2024, the ACT
announced that the test duration was shortened; the science section, like the writing
one, would become optional; and online testing would be rolled out nationally in spring
2025 and for school-day testing in spring 2026. [16] The ACT has seen a gradual increase
in the number of test takers since its inception, and in 2012 the ACT surpassed the
SAT for the first time in total test takers; that year, 1, 666, 017 students took
the ACT and 1, 664, 479 students took the SAT. [17] ACT, Inc. , says that the ACT
assessment measures high school students' general educational development and their
capability to complete college-level work with the multiple choice tests covering
four skill areas: English, mathematics, reading, and (optionally) science. [1] The
optional Writing Test measures skill in planning and writing a short essay. [18] Specifically,