through a mix of narrow, rustic woodland trails and newly constructed pathways, your
friendly Park Ranger will share interesting insights. Please wear comfortable closed-toe
shoes and bring water to stay hydrated. Keep in mind that there may not be restroom
facilities available on this hike, so plan accordingly. This hike is open to everyone,
whether you’re a seasoned hiker or just starting out. It’s a perfect way to enjoy
the outdoors and learn something new about Emerald View Park. We hope to see you there!
6/22 Hays Woods Park - Ranger Guided Wildlife Hike Location: Agnew Road Trailhead,
(nearest residential address 1019 Agnew road) Location: Agnew Road Trailhead, (nearest
residential address 1019 Agnew road) Time: 2: 00PM-3: 30PM Time: 2: 00PM-3: 30PM Details:
Come explore Pittsburgh’s newest city park with the Park Rangers! The secluded woodlands,
lush creek valleys, and open meadows of Hays woods host a vibrant array of wildlife
found nowhere else in the city. We will be walking approximately 2 miles on intermediate
difficulty single track trails throughout the park. Bring sturdy shoes and water.
Dogs are welcome on leash. Registration is not required but recommended for updates
and cancelations due to weather. Details: Come explore Pittsburgh’s newest city park
with the Park Rangers! The secluded woodlands, lush creek valleys, and open meadows
of Hays woods host a vibrant array of wildlife found nowhere else in the city. We
will be walking approximately 2 miles on intermediate difficulty single track trails
throughout the park. Bring sturdy shoes and water. Dogs are welcome on leash. Registration
is not required but recommended for updates and cancelations due to weather. Registration
Link: https: //www. eventbrite. com/cc/hays-woods-park-guided-hiking-series-4344233
Registration Link: https: //www. eventbrite. com/cc/hays-woods-park-guided-hiking-series-4344233
Questions? Please Contact: Ranger MJ Madeleine. walting@pittsburghpa. gov Questions?
Please Contact: Ranger MJ Madeleine. walting@pittsburghpa. gov 6/23: Monday Meetup
Details: Join the Emerald View Park Rangers for a free activity at Emerald View Park’s
playgrounds, perfect for all ages. Immerse yourself in nature and spark your creativity
with our vibrant Coffee Filter Butterfly craft! No registration is required—just come
by and join the fun. We look forward to seeing you there! Details: Join the Emerald
View Park Rangers for a free activity at Emerald View Park’s playgrounds, perfect
for all ages. Immerse yourself in nature and spark your creativity with our vibrant
Coffee Filter Butterfly craft! No registration is required—just come by and join the
fun. We look forward to seeing you there! 6/28: Firefly Presentation Details: Come
learn about fireflies during one of their most active times of the year with Pittsburgh
Park Rangers! We will observe the fireflies in a nearby field, while Rangers share
knowledge about them and their behavior. There will also be an educational activity
involving flashlights. This is not a hike, but there will be a short amount of walking
involved on sloped terrain. Please wear close-toed shoes and bring water bottles with
you. Details: Come learn about fireflies during one of their most active times of