Bismarck negotiated the League of the Three Emperors, which included Austria-Hungary,
Russia, and Germany. After the 1877–1878 Russo-Turkish War, the League was dissolved
due to Austrian concerns over the expansion of Russian influence in the Balkans, an
area they considered to be of vital strategic interest. Germany and Austria-Hungary
then formed the 1879 Dual Alliance, which became the Triple Alliance when Italy joined
in 1882. [10] For Bismarck, the purpose of these agreements was to isolate France
by ensuring the three empires resolved any disputes among themselves. In 1887, Bismarck
set up the Reinsurance Treaty, a secret agreement between Germany and Russia to remain
neutral if either were attacked by France or Austria-Hungary. [11] For Bismarck, peace
with Russia was the foundation of German foreign policy, but in 1890, he was forced
to retire by Wilhelm II. The latter was persuaded not to renew the Reinsurance Treaty
by his new Chancellor, Leo von Caprivi. [12] This gave France an opening to agree
to the Franco-Russian Alliance in 1894, which was then followed by the 1904 Entente
Cordiale with Britain. The Triple Entente was completed by the 1907 Anglo-Russian
Convention. While not formal alliances, by settling longstanding colonial disputes
in Asia and Africa, British support for France or Russia in any future conflict became
a possibility. [13] This was accentuated by British and Russian support for France
against Germany during the 1911 Agadir Crisis. [14] German economic and industrial
strength continued to expand rapidly post-1871. Backed by Wilhelm II, Admiral Alfred
von Tirpitz sought to use this growth to build an Imperial German Navy that could
compete with the British Royal Navy. [15] This policy was based on the work of US
naval author Alfred Thayer Mahan, who argued that possession of a blue-water navy
was vital for global power projection; Tirpitz had his books translated into German,
while Wilhelm made them required reading for his advisors and senior military personnel.
[16] Bismarck opposed any attempt to compete with the Royal Navy, since he believed
Britain would not interfere in Europe as long as its maritime supremacy remained secure.
His dismissal in 1890 led to a change in policy and the start of an Anglo-German naval
arms race. [17] Despite the vast sums spent by Tirpitz, the launch of HMS Dreadnought
in 1906 made every existing battleship obsolete, and gave the British a technological
advantage they never relinquished. [15] Ultimately, Germany invested huge resources
on creating a navy large enough to antagonise Britain, but not defeat it. In 1911,
Chancellor Theobald von Bethmann Hollweg acknowledged defeat, leading to the Rüstungswende
or 'armaments turning point', when he switched expenditure from the navy to the army.
[18] This decision was driven by German concerns over the speed of Russia's recovery
from defeat in the Russo-Japanese War and the subsequent 1905 Russian Revolution.
Economic reforms led to a significant post-1908 expansion of railways and transportation
infrastructure, particularly in its western border regions. [19] Since Germany and