Community Events in Pittsburgh | Pittsburgh City Paper
Community
News
Events
Events
All Events
Submit an Event Listing
Places
Best Of
Best Of
Winners
Voting + Details
Movie Times
Promoted Events
Jazz at Emmanuel
Promoted
Hauntings, Legends & Gallery Readings: An Evening with the Psychic Vincent Sisters
Spooky Spirits Walk
Community Events in Pittsburgh
Submit an Event
All Dates
---
---
---
---
---
---
---
This Weekend
38
results
page 1
of 2
412 Sips & Spirits
Fri., Oct. 10, 7-11 p.m.
Kingfly Spirits
2613 Smallman St., Pittsburgh
Strip District
Get Tickets
$50
Fundraisers, Community
412 Sips & Spirits is the ultimate 21+ Halloween costume party in the Strip District, presented by Tarasa Hurley Realty and 412 Gives Back! All proceeds benefit the local charity One Day to Remember. The night features a cash bar with spooky sips, delicious small bites, and a nonstop dance floor takeover with You Pick Entertainment and BMW The DJ. Show off your best look in the costume contest, capture memories at the roaming photo booth, and don’t miss the return of the 412 Draw, where one lucky winner will score a $1,200 Glam & Gala Package!
2164700145
Robert Redford Classics
Oct. 10-16
The Lindsay Theater and Cultural Center
418 Walnut Street, Sewickley
Sewickley
Get Tickets
$11
Screen, Community
The Lindsay Theater and Cultural Center is honoring late Hollywood legend Robert Redford by showing two of his most prominent films from Friday, Oct. 10, through Thursday, Oct. 16. "The Sting" and "Out of Africa" are both Best Picture Oscar winners starring Redford, who died last month at age 89. "The Sting" stars Redford and Paul Newman as swindlers trying to pull off the ultimate con. "Out of Africa" stars Redford and Meryl Streep as star-crossed lovers in early 20th-century Kenya. Tickets for all showtimes of both films are available for $11 at The Lindsay or online via https://thelindsaytheater.org/event/robert-redford-classics/.
4122598542
Content Writing Service | Affordable Price
| Cheap Content Writers
First Monday-Sunday of every month, 12 p.m.
Pittsburgh Writing Exchange
321 S. Graham St, Pittsburgh
Friendship
Get Tickets
Community
I am professional content writer with 5 years experience working currently with content writing service.
Welcome to content writing service one of the best custom paper writing services on the web.
For several years content writing service has been providing high-quality Article Writing Services
We specialize in preparing Article Writing Services, Blog Writing Services, SEO Writing Services,Social Media Writing
Services,Guest Post Writing Services and Product Description Writing on a wide variety of Content.
Each of our Content is 100% original and quality assured.
Get high quality content writing services for really affordable price. Hire the best USA
Content Writers With
Pittsburgh Queer History Project: Calendar Girls in the House of Tilden
Through Jan. 10, 2026, 5:30-7:30 p.m.
Kelly Strayhorn Theater
5941 Penn Ave., Pittsburgh
East Liberty
Get Tickets
$0-$20
Community
Lucky’s House of Tilden (H.O.T.) was an after-hours queer disco in East Liberty from 1970 to 1981. H.O.T. was a key site of subcultural politics and pleasure during the neighborhood’s mid-century upheaval. Four blocks away and 50 years apart from KST, Curator Harrison Apple showcases H.O.T. and the Pittsburgh Queer History Project’s photo archive, which includes documentation of early queer, trans, and performers of color who dominated the disco era. While the physical architecture has long been demolished, Calendar Girls in the House of Tilden celebrates the celebrity at work behind the guarded door on Penn Avenue.
+14123633000
Christine Marie Plays with a Full Deck
Fridays, 4-8 p.m.
Sparkle Dragon's Magical Emporium
2120 Broadway Ave, Beechview
Beechview
25+
Community
20 years experience, Christine reads your Tarot, Handwriting, and Astrology Charts LIVE. Peruse the wares. There's something for everyone at Sparkle Dragon's Magical Emporium
412-508-3393
412 cubed, Paint Shutter Word / the NEIGHBORHOOD
Thursdays-Saturdays, 12-8 p.m.
Spinning Plate Gallery
5821 Baum Boulevard, Pittsburgh
Downtown
Free
Exhibits, Visual Art, Community
A cross pollination of photographs, paintings and writing, all about the NEIGHBORHOOD, what it looks like, feels like, sounds like; what memories we hold, what stories we have to tell each other. A collaborative experiment by
4 Photographers, 4 Painters and 2 Writers.
Inviting the viewer into a conversation on the diversity and texture
of Pittsburgh Neighborhoods.
We look forward to you sharing your memories with us as well as the exhibitors invite you in to the conversation.
831-809-9307
International African Penguin Awareness Day
Sat., Oct. 11, 10:30 a.m.-4 p.m.
National Aviary
Allegheny Commons West, Pittsburgh
North Side
Get Tickets
Included with Admission
Community
International African Penguin Awareness Day is a celebration of all things African Penguin! Wear your best black-and-white outfit as we roll out the metaphorical black-and-white carpet for our flightless friends!
4123237235
Steel Rippers Underground Bike Rally & Launch Party
Sat., Oct. 11, 1-6 p.m.
Penn Brewery
800 Vinial Street, Pittsburgh
Troy Hill
Get Tickets
Community
Step into the underground. Steel Rippers, a new motorcycle apparel company, is launching with a full-throttle rally and party that celebrates everything raw, loud, and unapologetically biker. Expect a night packed with live music from Fuse, smoke curling from fine cigars, tattoo artistry happening on-site, and the kind of biker grit you won’t find at a polished brewery party.
41-223-79400
Outfest
Sat., Oct. 11, 3-8 p.m.
Hazelwood Green Plaza
Lytle St & Eliza St, Pittsburgh
Hazelwood
Community, Drag, Festivals
OUTfest is Pittsburgh’s inaugural festival celebrating the identity, culture, and spirit of the LGBTQIA+ community. Taking place on October 11, 2025 at Hazelwood Green, it coincides with National Coming Out Day to honor authenticity and community connection. The event offers family hours with live performances, face painting, and activities for all ages, followed by adult-oriented programming including a vogue & runway competition, a gender-affirming clothing swap, vendor booths, and local performers. OUTfest highlights local LGBTQIA+ talent and organizations, promotes small business, and cultivates a safe, welcoming space for everyone to thrive. To get involved, visit the event website for options
XXXXXXXXXX
Markets at The Terminal
Saturdays, 11 a.m.-3 p.m. Continues through Oct. 25
Strip District Terminal
2101 Smallman St, Pittsburgh
Strip District
Free
Marketplace, Community
Explore Pittsburgh’s local talent at Markets at The Terminal.
Every Saturday from 11 a.m.-3 p.m. from May through October, this vibrant outdoor market features a rotating lineup of local vendors that offer everything from handcrafted goods to homemade treats and more.
Enjoy live music from DJ Breis Gordan while you browse, then make a day of it by visiting the one-of-a-kind dining, entertainment, fitness, and retail at The Terminal.
Learn more at StripDistrictTerminal.com/happenings.
412-763-1660
Recruiting singers for Coro Latinoamericano
Sundays, 5:15-5:30 p.m.
First Unitarian Church
605 Morewood Avenue, Pittsburgh
Shadyside
$25/month dues
Auditions, Community
The Coro Latinoamericano – Pittsburgh, founded in 1997, is a secular community choir with a professional director.
We are dedicated to building bridges to other peoples and cultures in Pittsburgh and beyond through choral music from the countries of Central and South America, the Caribbean, and the Iberian Peninsula. As a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization, Coro Latinoamericano – Pittsburgh is committed to educational outreach and the cultural enrichment of the Pittsburgh and Southwestern Pennsylvania region, and beyond.
Knowledge of Spanish and/or music sight-reading are not required, but a plus.
We've recently collaborated with the Mendelssohn Choir and the Heritage Gospel Chorale.
412-345-1047
Christian Science Church Service
Wednesdays, 7:30-8:30 p.m. and Sundays, 11-12 a.m.
First Church of Christ, Scientist
201 North Dithridge at Bayard Street, Oakland, Pittsburgh
Oakland
free
Community
An hour of quiet time for inspiration. Bible Lesson-Sermon and Hymns. Sunday School 11a for children. In church or email for Zoom invitation. Parking
412 621-5339
Guided Meditation
Tuesdays
Thrive on Health
730 Brookline Boulevard, PIttsburgh
Brookline
Get Tickets
$5 suggested donation
Community
Meditation is such a helpful practice for your overall health, but it can be slightly daunting to find the right modality that works for you. Join us for a weekly hour of mindfulness in a group setting.
Chey of Smoky Quartz Magick & Divination will lead the meditations, which will vary weekly depending on the needs of the group as well as the challenges of the time frame according to the astrological forecast.
They will assist by walking you through different styles, breathing techniques, mudras, and other methods to be able to craft a meditation routine that works for you.
412-714-6620
Tuesday Open Mic Night w/ Pittsburgh Poetry Collective
Tuesdays, 7-10 p.m.
Poetry Lounge
313 North Ave., Pittsburgh
Millvale
FREE
Literary, Community
Open Mic Night with poets, musicians, comedians, artists, dancers, performers, magicians, philosophers, clowns... and more
4123374403
Pittsburgh TubClub
Wednesdays, 6:30-9:30 p.m.
Brady Memorial Home
1151 South Side Ave, Pittsburgh
North Side
Get Tickets
$15-$30 ($11-$22 sale price before Sunday at 11:59pm
Community
One of Pittsburgh’s premiere contrast therapy communities. We offer breathwork, cold plunging, sauna, and community.
716-499-3352
Landmark Lectures: People & Place - Bishop Benjamin Tucker Tanner & Family
Third Thursday of every month, 6:30-7:30 p.m.
Get Tickets
free with registration
Community
Matthew Falcone, President of Preservation Pittsburgh, will talk regarding the possibility of applying for a historic marker for Bishop Tanner (1835-1923).
With roots in Pittsburgh, Tanner was a leading clergyman, author, and was editor from 1868-1884 of The Christian Recorder, the largest Black-owned newspaper in the country at the time.
Tanner and his wife Sarah had four children, including Henry Ossawa Tanner, who was the first Black painter to gain international acclaim, as well as Halle Tanner Dillon Johnson, one of the first Black women physicians.
4122568755
Maude Movie Night
Thursdays
FREE
Community
Maude Movie Nights are part of our ongoing effort to create community space for LGBTQIA+ witches. But also ANYONE who is a friend of a queer witch is welcome. ♥ (and we mean that in a figurative way. Come MAKE a queer witch friend if you don't have one already. We don't bite!)
Our weekly themes:
Week 1: something magical and cute
Week 2: LGBTQIA+ themed
Week 3: something magical and cute
Week 4:
Wild card movie! Anything goes! Could be spooky, could be spaceballs.
Week 5: Documentary (probably about magic or LQBTQIA+/social justice
Sound Bath and Crystal Healing
Fri., Oct. 17, 7-8 p.m.
Songbird Artistry
4316 Penn Ave., Pittsburgh
Lawrenceville
Get Tickets
$28
Community
New monthly event! Sound baths, with crystal healing! Quiet your mind, reduce stress, and sink into deep relaxation as you’re bathed in the calming vibrations of singing bowls. While Amanda Smith is healing you with sound, Sabrina McQuarrie, the owner of Sabrina’s Spells and Crystals, will be placing crystals on your body to encourage extra healing through vibrational power of ethically sourced crystals. Each attendee will take home a mini crystal kit included in your ticket price to continue your healing and meditate with at home! Tickets are $28, and the first sound bath event is October 17th.
412-427-5500
Bit Bridge Halloween Showcase 2025
Sat., Oct. 18, 3-6 p.m.
Iron City Circus Arts
711 South 21st Street, Pittsburgh
South Side
Get Tickets
Free
Games, Community, Visual Art
Come play indie games, see original game art, and listen to music, all made by local developers! If you're an indie dev, a student, or just want to play cool local indie games and chat with local devs, stop by and check it out. Costumes are (as always) not required, but highly encouraged! If you're a game developer, game artist, or game-dev-adjacent creator and you think you you'd like to show some of your work, look for more info in the Eventbrite.
412-253-2512
Brewing for a Cause
Sat., Oct. 18, 6-10 p.m.
Velum Fermentation
2120 Jane St, Pittsburgh
South Side
Get Tickets
25.00
Fundraisers, Community
This in-person event will bring together commercial and home brewers to raise funds for a good cause. Whether you're a fan of creative beers or dogs and cats, there will be something for everyone.
The event is a craft beer festival featuring homebrews, ciders, and meads that benefits Paws Across Pittsburgh, a local non-profit animal rescue. It is a dog-friendly event with food trucks, auction items, and vendors.
7242223333
Bus Tour of the Jewish Monongahela Valley
Sun., Oct. 19, 8:30 a.m.-4 p.m.
Rodef Shalom Congregation Pittsburgh
4905 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh
Allentown
Get Tickets
$50
Community
Join the Rauh Jewish Archives and Classrooms Without Borders for a bus tour of Jewish heritage in the Monongahela Valley. We'll meet at Rodef Shalom before continuing to Charleroi, Brownsville, and Donora. Lunch will be on your own at Brownsville. The tour will be facilitated by Eric Lidji, Director of the Rauh Jewish Archives, and Kate Lukaszewicz of Classrooms Without Borders.
4122123267
Carnegie Screenwriters Showcase 2025
Sun., Oct. 19, 1-5 p.m.
The Lindsay Theater and Cultural Center
418 Walnut Street, Sewickley
Sewickley
Get Tickets
Free
Screen, Community
The 2025 Carnegie Screenwriters Showcase will take place at The Lindsay Theater and Cultural Center (in Sewickley) on Sunday, Oct. 19, from 1-5 p.m. Carnegie Screenwriters is a creative collective that first formed in 1998 and since has grown to include writers, filmmakers, film artists, actors, teachers, and students from Western Pennsylvania and beyond. Their 2025 showcase will feature 10 short films created by Carnegie Screenwriter members, including Pittsburgh-based filmmakers like Josh Poe, Delaney Hathaway and Clayton Petrella. This event is free, and The Lindsay recommends that all prospective attendees RSVP in advance due to space limitations.
4122598542
These Walls Can Talk Poetry Reading & Community Art Inspired by the Vanka Murals
Sun., Oct. 19, 2-4 p.m.
Murals of Maxo Vanka
24 Maryland Ave, Millvale
Millvale
Get Tickets
FREE
Community, Literary, Kidstuff
Join us for an afternoon where words, art, and community intersect, inspired by Maxo Vanka’s powerful murals.
We’re bringing writers from Carlow University’s Madwomen in the Attic program to the Vanka Murals for a public poetry reading. They'll share new works inspired by the murals' themes of justice, labor, immigration, and motherhood.
While the poetry readings are happening upstairs, the church hall will be a vibrant space for all-ages artmaking. Vanka Educators will lead hands-on activities, perfect for kids and anyone who wants to create (Kids under 5 must be accompanied by an adult).
412-821-3438
Rostraver Sportsmen Club Member Meeting
Third Monday of every month, 7:30-8:30 p.m.
Community
Please join us for our monthly meeting. All members are encouraged to attend.
Northside Digital Literacy Class
Third Tuesday of every month, 12:30-4:30 p.m.
CoLab18 at Nova Place
100 S. Commons, Pittsburgh
North Side
Get Tickets
Free
Other Stuff, Community
In collaboration with the NorthSide North Shore Chamber of Commerce, NorthSide Works! and One NorthSide, the WIN Workforce Development Program is pleased to offer free or low-cost custom individual and group digital literacy classes to individuals facing economic hardship seeking to remove employment barriers and find sustainable employment.
Each month we will teach basic digital literacy skills and host walk-in hours for the computer lab to help you find sustainable employment. If you are interested in attending the class, please fill out your information here: https://bit.ly/4d5LXBr
412-904-2669
Lead Safe Allegheny’s Life Without Lead Summit
Wed., Oct. 22, 8:30 a.m.-3:30 p.m.
Get Tickets
Free
Community
Join us for an exciting day at the Life Without Lead Summit! This event is your chance to learn, connect, and take action for a lead-safe future in Allegheny County. Hear from inspiring speakers, engage in thought-provoking discussions, and discover innovative solutions to eliminate lead from our lives and prevent childhood lead poisoning. Lead poisoning affects communities as a whole, so we all need to take responsibility for addressing this issue. Together, we can make a difference and create a healthier world for ourselves and future generations.
Project SAFE's Purple Takeover
Sat., Oct. 25, 11 a.m.-1 p.m.
Carlow University
3333 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh
Oakland
FREE
Community, Kidstuff, Visual Art
Join Carlow University's Project SAFE to honor National Domestic Violence Awareness Month!
Join us on Carlow University's campus to cover our driveway in purple chalk! October is National Domestic Violence Awareness month, and we want to be allies for all survivors. This event is open to the public, and we're going to need a lot of help! Light refreshments will be available including The Roaming Bean coffee.
412-578-8749
Creative Hive
Tue., Oct. 28, 5:30-7:30 p.m.
Ketchup City Creative
612 Main Street, Sharpsburg
Sharpsburg
Get Tickets
FREE
Community
Join the Greater Pittsburgh Arts Council for the Creative Hive, a free monthly community-building event designed to provide a friendly and casual space for artists, creatives, art educators, culture bearers, and arts administrators to establish and foster professional relationships. This month, view artwork from artist Marlon Eazywider and join a "Creative Walk," exploring nearby creative organizations Prototype and Atithi Studios
(412) 391-2060
Fall Fest at the Thursday Market
Thu., Oct. 30, 12 p.m.
Harold Young Sr. Parklet
739 Penn Ave, Wilkinsburg, PA 15221, Pittsburgh
Wilkinsburg
Community
Celebrate the season at Fall Fest at the Thursday Market on Thursday, October 30th, from 4:00 to 6:00 PM at the Harold Young, Sr. Parklet in Wilkinsburg! Enjoy an afternoon full of food, fun, and music with performances by Friends of Funk. Kids can look forward to free pumpkins, goodie bags, face painting, and balloons, while everyone can browse the regular vendors and produce distribution. This festive community event is open to the public and proudly presented by the Greater Wilkinsburg Community Advancement Association.
n/a
“Songs for Gaza” - Local Musicians To Present Fundraising Concert for World Central Kitchen for Gaza Famine
Sat., Nov. 1, 7-11 p.m.
City Winery Pittsburgh
1627 Smallman Street, Pittsburgh
Strip District
Get Tickets
20.00
Community, Politics
On Saturday, November 1st, 7 PM, at the Original Pittsburgh Winery in the Strip District, a group of activist Pittsburgh musicians, artists and supporters, will host a concert to raise critical funds for relief efforts of the World Central Kitchen in Gaza. One hundred percent of donations will go directly to famine relief.
Bill Toms -
Phat Man Dee -
André Costello - https://www.instagram.com/andre_costello
Kelsey Jumper -
Mark Dignam -
Liz McBride -
Lauren DeMichiei -
David Dickinson -
Abbey Martin - Art Donsky
4125004363
1
2
next
Submit an Event
© 2025 Pittsburgh City Paper
About Us
Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Powered by Newspack