Events in Pittsburgh with Promoted | Pittsburgh City Paper
Community
News
Events
Events
All Events
Submit an Event Listing
Places
Best Of
Best Of
Winners
Voting + Details
Movie Times
Promoted Events
Jazz at Emmanuel
Promoted
Hauntings, Legends & Gallery Readings: An Evening with the Psychic Vincent Sisters
Spooky Spirits Walk
Events in Pittsburgh with Promoted
Submit an Event
All Dates
---
---
---
---
---
---
---
This Weekend
10
results
page 1
of 1
Jazz at Emmanuel
Sun., Oct. 12, 5-6:30 p.m.
Emmanuel Episcopal Church
957 West North Ave, Pittsburgh
North Side
free
Jazz
An ecumenical jazz service, free and open to all.
Swinging jazz mixed with the spoken word.
This month's theme is Harvest.
Musicians in include Ronni Weiss – vocals, Scott Boni - alto saxophone, Mark Strickland - guitar, Leon Boykins - bass, Thomas Wendt - drums and musical director.
412-231-0454
New Choices Career Development Classes
Mondays-Fridays, 9:30 a.m.-12:30 p.m.
Pennsylvania Women Work
650 Smithfield Street, Suite 520, Pittsburgh
Downtown
FREE
Other Stuff
New Choices is a FREE, comprehensive career program, where you'll learn job search and interview skills, goal-setting, and the confidence to succeed. You’ll update your resume, refresh your computer skills, and learn conflict resolution, budgeting, and time management – plus individualized career coaching and job search assistance. Day/evening classes available starting soon Downtown, or at extended sites throughout Pittsburgh. Whether you're starting out or re-entering the workforce, our 20 years of expertise will make you a stronger candidate. New Choices has helped over 55,000 people find living-wage jobs and build lasting careers! Call to register or for more information!
412-742-4362
Spellbound Escape Room
Ongoing, 12-9 p.m.
60 Minute Missions Escape Room
116 E Pittsburgh Street, Lower Level, Greensburg
Greensburg
Get Tickets
$25
Games
Becoming a wizard isn’t easy. You’ve traveled to the magic school and taken the admissions exam, but didn’t pass. As a result, a horrible curse has been placed on you to ensure you don’t attempt further magic as a muggle.
Your train ride home has been summoned, but the door to the wizarding world is within reach. Can you reverse the curse and prove that you have the skills to join the wizarding school before your ride home arrives?
724-383-6066
412 cubed, Paint Shutter Word / the NEIGHBORHOOD
Thursdays-Saturdays, 12-8 p.m.
Spinning Plate Gallery
5821 Baum Boulevard, Pittsburgh
Downtown
Free
Exhibits, Visual Art, Community
A cross pollination of photographs, paintings and writing, all about the NEIGHBORHOOD, what it looks like, feels like, sounds like; what memories we hold, what stories we have to tell each other. A collaborative experiment by
4 Photographers, 4 Painters and 2 Writers.
Inviting the viewer into a conversation on the diversity and texture
of Pittsburgh Neighborhoods.
We look forward to you sharing your memories with us as well as the exhibitors invite you in to the conversation.
831-809-9307
Roots Sessions Ohio River Reggae Party
Sun., Oct. 12
East End Brewing Pop-Up
1836 Oxline St, Pittsburgh
North Side
Reggae
Come enjoy some reggae music along the river with the Roots Sessions crew, DJ Sizzla and special guests.
Jah knows we need this music to help us navigate through the political shitstorm and atrocities that are happening here and across the world. We will lift those spirits and dance away the day together.
Right along the bike path just west of the Casino. Plenty of parking available too.
https://goodfoodpittsburgh.com/east-end-brewing-takes.../
(412) 537-2337
Guided Meditation
Tuesdays
Thrive on Health
730 Brookline Boulevard, PIttsburgh
Brookline
Get Tickets
$5 suggested donation
Community
Meditation is such a helpful practice for your overall health, but it can be slightly daunting to find the right modality that works for you. Join us for a weekly hour of mindfulness in a group setting.
Chey of Smoky Quartz Magick & Divination will lead the meditations, which will vary weekly depending on the needs of the group as well as the challenges of the time frame according to the astrological forecast.
They will assist by walking you through different styles, breathing techniques, mudras, and other methods to be able to craft a meditation routine that works for you.
412-714-6620
Celebrating Celine with Jenene Caramielo
Sun., Oct. 19, 2:30-4:15 p.m.
New Hazlett Theater
Allegheny Square East, Pittsburgh
North Side
Get Tickets
$29-$39
Pop, Rock, Other Music
Celebrate the music of Celine Dion with powerhouse vocalist Jenene Caramielo and a live band in Celebrating Celine, a stunning tribute to the global superstar. Known for her dynamic stage presence and remarkable vocal range, Caramielo channels the heart and soul of Celine’s iconic performances. From soaring anthems to heartfelt ballads, she delivers unforgettable renditions of hits like “I Drove All Night,” “The Power of Love,” “Courage,” and many more.
Jenene, a breast cancer survivor, is happy for this concert to help raise money and bring awareness to the importance of the work done by A Glimmer of Hope Foundation.
412-320-4610
Gala Baila
Sun., Oct. 19, 6:30-8 p.m.
The Original Pittsburgh Winery
2809 Penn Avenue, Pittsburgh
Strip District
Get Tickets
$25
Dance
Flamenco Pittsburgh presents Gala Baila, the organization’s second annual fundraiser at The Original Pittsburgh Winery. Gala Baila marks the start of our fundraising season. Flamenco Pittsburgh culminated its inaugural 2025 season of dynamic sold out performances with nationally recognized flamenco guest artists.
The Flamenco Pittsburgh Ensemble will perform with featured soloists Valentina Beltrán, Flor Isava-Machi, and Carolina Loyola-Garcia. Joining the evening will be acclaimed Washington D.C.-based choreographer and dancer Edwin Aparicio, alongside New York-based singer Bárbara Martínez and Los Angeles-based guitarist Alex Jordan.
Join us to support and nurture Flamenco Pittsburgh’s work.
N/A
FREE COMEDY NIGHT
Last Friday of every month, 8-10 p.m.
Fat Cat Eats, Drinks & Music
520 E Ohio St, Pittsburgh
North Side
Get Tickets
FREE!
Comedy
Come out for a bite to eat and some free laughs from some of the best local comedians at Fat Cat on East Ohio Street in the Northside.
Join us the last Friday of each month with James Phelps hosting a real treat of a troupe.
Located on the second floor in our event space, The Scratching Post. Ages 21+
Follow us @fatcatpgh to stay up on our upcoming events.
4123210220
ROHNA CLASSIFIED
Sat., Nov. 8, 3-4:30 p.m.
Get Tickets
Free
Screen, Other Stuff
In honor of VETERANS DAY 2025--a SCREENING @ Monaca Public Library of the Documentary: Rohna Classified--Saturday November 8 @ 3:00 pm.
This is the only Screening in the Greater Pittsburgh Area.
Free event.
Information concerning the sinking of the HMT Rohna was classified by the US government until the mid-1990s.
The Rohna, a WWII transport ship was equipped with non-functioning lifeboats and inadequate lifebelts was sunk by one of the first radio-guided missiles ever used in war.
1,015 U.S. soldiers were killed in the attack that remains the greatest loss of life at sea in the history of any U.S.
724-775-9608
Submit an Event
© 2025 Pittsburgh City Paper
About Us
Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Powered by Newspack