Tickets for Fleetwood Gold in Oakmont from ShowClix
Go Back
showclix
This order is being recorded as being placed by a ShowClix representative .
View the event wiki page
View event in admin
Clear User
A per ticket phone order fee of $2.00 will be applied to this order.
Warning
Oh, no! You don't have JavaScript enabled!Javascript is required to use this website and to purchase tickets.
Share
Share
Tweet
Add to Calendar
Set Reminder
Oct
10
Fleetwood Gold
Fri. Oct 10, 2025 at 7:30pm
EDT
All Ages
Today
All Ages
Get Tickets
Details
Event Stats
Today
All Ages
Event Description
Doors 6:30 PM / Show 7:30 PM
$20-25 Theater Seats
$30 Bar Seating
$140 Table Seating for 4
Fleetwood Gold - The Fleetwood Mac Experience
America's #1 Fleetwood Mac Experience ... the best of Fleetwood Mac, Stevie Nicks and Peter Green.
Fleetwood Gold, The Fleetwood Mac Experience, is the most followed Fleetwood Mac tribute band in the Midwest, performing for more than 45,000 fans in the last twelve months. The band is led by two-time national blues guitar champion and lead singer for Blood, Sweat and Tears Chris Shutters (Lyndsey) and Columbus, Ohio-based singers/songwriters Erika Prehm(Stevie) and Sara Reat (Christine).
It’s all about the music. No backing tracks or tricks. They will take you on a musical journey through the best of Fleetwood Mac, from the early Peter Green years through Stevie Nicks’ solo career. In less than three years, Fleetwood Gold, has set itself apart from other tributes with their tightly fused vocal harmonies, lead vocals and instrumental excellence. Experience the magic of Fleetwood Gold.
Songs include Go Your Own Way, Say You Love Me, Stop Dragging My Heart Around, The Chain, Never Going Back Again, Landslide, Don’t Stop, Everywhere, Dreams, Oh Well, Little Lies, Tusk, Black Magic Woman, Gold Dust Woman and more. (setlist subject to change)
Visit www.FleetwoodGold.com for more info and videos.
Fleetwood Gold, not just a tribute band, an experience. All songs are covers.
Disclaimer: Dancing during concerts is allowed and encouraged so please be aware when selecting your seats
Comments
Select Tickets
Sorry, tickets are no longer available online.
Venue Details
The Oaks Theater
310 Allegheny River BlvdOakmont,
PA 15139
Join the Conversation
Twitter: @theoakstheater
Instagram: @theoakstheater
Follow the event with #theoakstheater
showclix
Support
Terms of Service
Privacy Policy
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information
showclix
© 2025 ShowClix.
All sales are final. Tickets are non-refundable.
Want to sell tickets online? Try ShowClix for your online ticket sales.