Season Tickets | Pittsburgh Penguins
Skip to Main Content
Tickets
Ticket Central
Season Memberships
12-Packs
Flex Plans
Premium Seating
Group Tickets
Single Game Tickets
Promotional Schedule
Special Offers
3D Seat Map
Team
Roster
In the System
Penguins Hall of Fame
Front Office Staff
News
Schedule
Navigation Menu
Video
Scores
Stats
Community
Community
Community Initiatives
Pittsburgh Penguins Foundation
Mario Lemieux Foundation
UPMC Healthcare Heroes
Iceburgh Appearances
Future Goals Hockey Scholar
Locker Room Leadership
Public Skate at UPMC66
50/50 Raffle
PPS All-Stars
Youth Hockey
Fans
Fans
Fan Central
Sign Up for Penguins Texts
Sign up for Penguins Emails
Download the Penguins App
Contact Us
Contest and Promotions
Colorful Fans
Book an Event
Mobile Wallpapers
FNB Power Play Package
Players on Social
Game Day
Game Day
Game Day Information
Know Before You Go
Parking and Directions
Birthday and Anniversary Greetings
Fan Guides
PPG Paints Arena Information
Penguins Radio Network
How to Watch Games
Commemorative
Tickets
Ice Crew
NHL Fan Code of Conduct
Hall of Fame
Shop
Shop
PensGear
Penguins Authentics
NHL Shop
NHL Auctions
League
Help
NHL.com
Ticket Central
Season Memberships
12-Packs
Flex Plans
Premium Seating
Group Tickets
Single Game Tickets
Special Offers
Interest Form
412.642.PENS
Live Chat
Interested in season memberships? Click below to be contacted by a Pittsburgh Penguins representative!
Interest Form
2025.26 Season Membership PricingSave off the gate price of tickets with season memberships!
2025.26 Half Season MembershipsView the must-see matchups that make up the Half Season Plan A/B schedules.
Friends and Family DiscountPurchase additional tickets for friends and family at a discounted rate!
Ticket Trade ProgramUnable to attend a game? Take advantage of our new Ticket Trade program!
Black and Gold Premier BenefitsHaving season tickets has its perks! See a full list of season ticket holder experiences.
Black and Gold Premier MarketplaceScore items from this season's theme and community nights!
Black and Gold Premier+Full season members can download our loyalty app to earn points and redeem rewards!
Season Membership FAQGet answers to common questions about tickets, benefits, and game day logistics.
Season Ticket Referral ProgramShare your passion for the Penguins with friends, family or coworkers and cash in with credit!
Business Ticket SolutionsLearn how the Penguins can assist your organization with its goals.
Meet the Ticketing TeamThe Ticketing Department is here to help! Contact us with your comments and suggestions.
Mobile TicketsEverything you need to know about accessing your tickets via a mobile device.
Make the Most of Your MembershipDiscover 40 creative ways to get the most value from your tickets and maximize their impact.
3D Seat MapFind the perfect seats with our Virtual Venue!
Season tickets are subject to the terms and conditions available at www.pittsburghpenguins.com/handbook
Season ticket holders are reminded to keep their mailing address current! Address changes should be emailed to [email protected]. We also send important season ticket holder updates including ticket discounts and special invitations through email. Not currently receiving season ticket holder emails? Please call the Pittsburgh Penguins Ticketing Department at 412-642-PENS.
Founding Partners
X
Instagram
Facebook
YouTube
TikTok
LinkedIn
Privacy Policy
Contact Us
pittsburghpenguins.com is the official website of the Pittsburgh Penguins. The Pittsburgh Penguins and pittsburghpenguins.com are trademarks of Pittsburgh Penguins LP. NHL, the NHL Shield, the word mark and image of the Stanley Cup and the word mark NHL Winter Classic are registered trademarks and NHL Stadium Series name and logo and the NHL Winter Classic logo are trademarks of the National Hockey League. NHL and NHL team marks are the property of the NHL and its teams. © NHL 2025. All Rights Reserved.
NHL.com Terms of Service
NHL.com Privacy Policy
Cookie Policy
Cookie Settings
Copyright Policy
Employment
Close