Student Side-By-Side Program
Skip to main content
Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra
Menu
Search Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra
Search
Calendar
Logout
Login
Promo Code
Cart
Search Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra
Search
Tickets
Single Tickets
Subscriptions
Choose
Your Own
Special Rates
Groups
Students & Teachers
Service Members
Series
Classics
Pops
Fiddlesticks
Specials
Saturday Sessions
About
Musicians
Music
Director
PSO
Conductors
President
& CEO
Advertise
More
Learning
Visit
Seating Charts
Frequently
Asked Questions
Dining
Directions
More
Give
Donate Now!
Individual
Giving
Corporate
Partnerships
Gala
More
Shop
Merchandise
CDs
Close Window
Time Out
You have exceeded the time limit and your seats have been released.
Time left to complete order
25/26 Student Side-By-Side
Experience the power of the orchestra
Applications Open!
Calling all teens! Connect with music-loving peers, dive deep into orchestra repertoire, and prepare for your Heinz Hall debut!
This program for high school students in grades 9-12 invites talented teen musicians to experience the power of making music inside a full symphony orchestra. Students from across the region join forces for an 8-week journey to discover what happens when passion, skill, rigor, and joy combine to bring orchestral music to life.
Applications Accepted
October 1, 2025–December 10, 2025
Student Side-by-Side Application Form→
Teacher Recommendation Form→
String and Trumpet Excerpts→
Students will be notified of application decisions during the week of January 26, 2026.
Program Events
February 24, 2026–April 14, 2026
PSO Associate Conductor Moon Doh leads this year’s cohort as you tackle full orchestra repertoire, sharpen instrumental technique, and become a fully formed ensemble. We will meet each Tuesday at Heinz Hall for student-only rehearsals and sectionals with PSO coaches. The PSO joins the final rehearsal on April 14, 2026.
Take the Stage
April 15, 2026
Perform on the Heinz Hall stage for family and friends! Experience the thrill of being part of a massive 100+ person orchestra when students and PSO musicians combine for a one-night-only event.
► Side-by-Side Schedule
All events take place at Heinz Hall in downtown Pittsburgh.
Thursday, February 19, 2026, 4:00–7:00 p.m.
Seating Auditions (invitation only, optional)
Tuesday, February 24, 2026, 5:00–7:00 p.m.
Program Orientation
Tuesday, March 3, 2026, 5:00–7:00 p.m.
Rehearsal #1: Full student orchestra
Tuesday, March 10, 2026, 5:00–7:00 p.m.
Rehearsal #2: Sectionals with PSO coaches
Tuesday, March 17, 2026, 5:00–7:00 p.m.
Rehearsal #3: Full student orchestra
Tuesday, March 24, 2026, 5:00–7:00 p.m.
Rehearsal #4: Sectionals with PSO coaches
Tuesday, March 31, 2026, 5:00–7:00 p.m.
Rehearsal #5: Full student orchestra
Tuesday, April 7, 2026, 5:00–7:00 p.m.
Rehearsal #6: Full student orchestra
Tuesday, April 14, 2026, 4:00–6:00 p.m.
Dress rehearsal: Full student orchestra with PSO
Wednesday, April 15, 2026, 6:30-7:00 p.m.
Spot-check rehearsal with PSO
Wednesday, April 15, 2026, 7:30 p.m.
Concert with PSO
► Side-by-Side Repertoire
GERSHWIN, Strike Up the Band
COPLAND, An Outdoor Overture
STILL, Selections from From the Black Belt
BERNSTEIN (arr. Mason), West Side Story
WILLIAMS, Olympic Spirit
*repertoire is subject to change
► Listen to the repertoire on YouTube
Our previous concert and sectionals
What's it like to be part of the program?
This has been the best program I’ve ever been a part of."
I really appreciated the welcoming and comfortable environment of the Side-by-Side program. This was made possible by my great stand partner and everyone that participated in and helped run the program."
I got to focus on precise intonation and keen attention to detail. I’ve taken that attention to detail with me into my practice and rehearsals.”
In Side-by-Side, I was able to make so many friends, as everyone there was driven by the same passions and had shared interests with me. It felt like people truly cared and appreciated music."
As someone who had no background experience with orchestra, it helped me understand my role in the ensemble. It also helped me learn how to blend with the rest of the musicians around me and focus on other people."
It helped me solidify previous work I have done with the program in the past, allowing me to become more confident in an orchestral setting with new musicians."
Frequently Asked Questions
Do I need to audition or submit a video?
There are no required in-person auditions to participate, however some parts require a screening process. Students applying for violin, viola, cello, or bass are required to submit video recordings of two excerpts from the repertoire, while trumpet applicants must submit one excerpt; all recordings should be shared via unlisted YouTube links. See student application for details or contact  Savanna Webber, Program Coordinator, at swebber@pittsburghsymphony.org for help.
How advanced of a musician do I need to be?
Any level of musician can apply; however, most students find that having at least an intermediate–late intermediate mastery of their instrument helps them feel successful in the program. Answering all questions on the student application and teacher recommendation thoroughly, with good detail, will help the selection committee decide if this program is a good fit for you.
Do I have to take private lessons?
No, you do not have to take private lessons. Your teacher recommendation can be from a music teacher at school or from a private teacher.
Do I need to be accepted into a music program after high school to apply?
Not at all! Side-by-Side is for all high school student musicians, regardless of your plans after high school. You must be in grade 9-12, play an orchestral instrument, and want to experience making music in a full orchestra setting!
How challenging is the repertoire?
The Side-by-Side program aims to select music that is challenging but still achievable for students playing at an intermediate to advanced level of proficiency. Previous pieces include Alberto Ginastera’s Estancia Suite, Samuel Coleridge-Taylor's Petite Suite, Arturo Márquez’s Danzon No.2 and selections from Edward Elgar’s Enigma Variations.
What instruments can apply for the program?
All orchestra instruments will be considered. We are currently not accepting applications for saxophone, baritone/euphonium, harp or piano.
Supported by:
This program is made possible by PSO's Educational Improvement Supporters.
Social Media
Facebook
Twitter
Instagram
YouTube
Join Our Email List
Click here to subscribe to our
email list for up-to-date notifications about concerts and events,
access to special pre-sales, ticket discounts and other special offers!
Address
Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra
600 Penn Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15222
Box Office Phone
412-392-4900
Contact Us
Hours
Weekdays
10:00 AM to 6:00 PM
Monday ONLY - Box Office closed for walk-up sales
Weekdays with performances
10:00 AM to 30 minutes after start of performance
Closed on non-performance days
Saturday
12:00 PM to 30 minutes after start of performance
Closed on non-performance days
Sunday
12:00 PM to 4:00 PM
Closed on non-performance days
Get Tickets
Single Tickets
Subscriptions
Choose Your Own
Special Rates
Groups
Students & Teachers
Service Members
Further Information
Groups
Students & Teachers
Service Members
About
Musicians
Music Director
PSO Conductors
President & CEO
Advertise
Press Room
More
Learning
Visit
Seating Charts
FAQ
Dining
Directions
More
Give
Donate Now!
Individual Giving
Corporate Partnerships
Gala
More
Shop
Privacy Policy
Public Disclosure Documents
Conditions of Use
Copyright 2025. All rights reserved.