A to Z Guide | PPG Paints Arena
PPG Paints Arena
Created with Sketch.
Employees
Promoter
Contact Us
Created with Sketch.
Created with Sketch.
Search
Search
Events & Tickets
Calendar of Events
Event Ticket Info
Pittsburgh Penguins Ticket Information
Group Sales
Seating Charts
Accessibility Accommodations
Tours
Radical Days 2024
PPG Paints Arena
Entrance Gates
News
Fun Facts
FAQs
Food & Beverage Concessions
Stay Connected
Job Opportunities
LEED Gold Certification
Le Magnifique
Contest
Plan Your Visit
Directions & Parking
Public Transportation
Where To Stay
FAQs
A to Z Guide
Know Before You Go
Private Rentals & Partnerships
Corporate Sponsorship
Booking & Rentals
Arena Floor
Captain Morgan Club
Casamigos Club
F.N.B. Club
RMU Conference Rooms
The Lexus Club
PPG Party Suites
Highmark Lobby
Ford Lounge
Coors
Light Igloo Club
Bunker Suites 66, 91, 92
F.N.B. Gate
FedEx Concourse
BetRivers Lounge
Promoters
Supplier Diversity Program
Premium Seating
Marquee Membership Club
Club Seats
Lexus Loge Boxes
PNC Legends Level Suites
Party Suites
Captain Morgan and F.N.B. Clubs
Lexus Club
_________________________________
Guest Services
FAQs
A to Z Guide
Accessibility Accommodations
Contact Us
Created with Sketch.
Search
Search
A to Z Guide
A
Accessible Parking
Accessible parking is available in a number of lots near PPG Paints Arena. These lots include East Lot, Fullerton Lot, South Lot, and West Lot. Designated spaces are available for vehicles displaying a current state-issued disability placard or license plate. These accessible spaces are filled on a first come, first served basis, so please plan accordingly. Additionally, accessible parking is available in the parking garage attached to PPG Paints Arena with the following conditions:
For all other events: Accessible and general parking in the garage will vary from event to event, based upon availability. For specific event availability, please call 412-642-1800 or through the PA Relay Service at 7-1-1.
The accessible drop-off location for PPG Paints Arena is located on Fifth Avenue near the EQT Gate at the southwest corner of PPG Paints Arena.
For more information regarding accessibility accommodations, please click here.
Accessible Seating
Accessible seating is available on all seating levels of PPG Paints Arena. Seating locations vary depending upon the event. When ordering accessible tickets, it is important to indicate what type of accessible seat you require, so that we can properly assist you.
To purchase accessible seating:
Visit www.ticketmaster.com, select your event, click on the "Request Accessible Seating" icon.
The DICK'S Sporting Goods Box Office at PPG Paints Arena also sells accessible seating. Please visit our ticket information page for hours and more information. For questions/concerns about accessible seating, please contact Guest Services.
For accessible seat locations, please view the seating chart on the individual event pages.
For more information regarding accessibility accommodations, please click here.
Address and Phone Number
PPG Paints Arena
1001 Fifth Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15219
412-642-1800
Alcohol
Guests of PPG Paints Arena must be 21 years of age or older to purchase and/or consume alcoholic beverages. ARAMARK reserves the right to check proof of legal drinking age.
There is a maximum of TWO (2) alcoholic beverages per purchase at all concession stands and portable vendors.
For Pittsburgh Penguins games, all alcohol sales within the arena will conclude at the beginning of the third period. Individual concerts and events are determined on a show to show basis.
ARAMARK has the right to discontinue the sale of alcohol at anytime during an event.
Anniversary Announcements
See special announcements
Assistive Listening Devices
Assistive Listening Devices are available for guests with hearing disabilities at all PPG Paints Arena events. To obtain an Assistive Listening Device, please visit our Guest Service location just outside section 104. Guests will be required to leave valid picture identification or credit card as collateral for the device.
For more information regarding accessibility accommodations, please click here.
ATM Machines
F.N.B. ATMs are available for the convenience of all patrons in the Highmark Lobby across from the DICK'S Sporting Goods Box Office, near Section 118 and near Section 229. PNC ATMs are available on the PNC Legends Level for suite ticket holders only.
Autographs
PPG Paints Arena does not support solicitation of autographs of any kind on PPG Paints Arena property. PPG Paints Arena also cannot accept autograph/photograph requests by mail.
Automotive Assistance Program
AAA will have a “Puck Truck” at all Penguins home games. The “Puck Truck” is available to assist patrons that have trouble with their vehicles in PPG Paints Arena lots only. Fans can call 1-800-AAA-HELP after the start of the third period.
B
Baby Changing Stations
Baby changing stations are available in all restrooms on all seating levels.
Backstage Passes
PPG Paints Arena does not issue or sell backstage passes to events. Backstage access is strictly limited and is arranged by tour management on a show-by-show basis.
Bags, Backpacks and Purses
For security purposes, ONLY wallets/wristlets (4"x6"x1"), and medical/diaper bags will be permitted inside PPG Paints Arena and all items are subject to searches upon entrance.
Large bags, coolers, backpacks and sealed packages (including gifts for performers and or athletes) of any kind are not permitted.
Banners and Signs
Banners and signs are permitted for most events, providing they are in good taste, as deemed by building management. Signs must not be commercial in nature or utilize wood, metal or other types of objects for support. They cannot be hung or fastened anywhere in the building or in any way obstruct another guest’s view or building signage
Binoculars
Binoculars and their cases are permitted for most events. All items are subject to searches upon arrival.
Birthday Announcements
See special announcements
Bottles and Cans
No bottles, cans or coolers are permitted inside PPG Paints Arena.
Box Office
The DICK'S Sporting Goods Box Office will only be open on event days.
Monday – Friday at 10am & Saturday – Sunday at 12pm.
(Days and times are subject to change)
For more information on tickets please visit PPG Paints Arena TicketMaster Page
Bus Parking
Parking is available for buses transporting groups to PPG Paints Arena. For more information, please contact the Group Sales Department at 412-804-7904.
C
Cameras
Cameras are permitted into PPG Paints Arena for Pittsburgh Penguins hockey games and most events. If allowed, PPG Paints Arena allows only small personal still-cameras equipped with 3 inch lens or smaller. Cameras with detachable lenses or flashes are not permitted. Video, audio and professional camera and recording devices are strictly prohibited in the building.
For all other events, camera policies will vary. For further information, please visit the individual event page closer to the event date.
Cell Phones
Use of cell phones in PPG Paints Arena is permitted, as long as it does not disturb other fans in the area or interfere with their ability to enjoy the event.
Children’s Ticketing Policy
For most events, children under the age of two are not required to have a ticket. However, should you wish for your child to have their own seat, a ticket is required. Shows intended for a younger audience (i.e., Sesame Street Live) require that children who have celebrated their first birthday have a ticket. Please check each event individually for age requirements.
Children under the age of 2 do not require a ticket to attend a Pittsburgh Penguins home game provided they sit on the lap of an adult throughout the game. Any child who has celebrated their 2nd birthday will need a ticket to enter the building.
Comments
Comments, concerns or questions can be submitted by emailing info@ppgpaintsarena.com
Concessions
Concessions provided by ARAMARK are available for purchase at PPG Paints Arena. Please remember ALL concessions are cashless.
Credit Cards
VISA, Discover, Mastercard and American Express credit cards are accepted at all merchandise and concession stands.
Customer Service
At all PPG Paints Arena events, customer service is available in the Guest Services room, located behind Section 104 on the FedEx Level. For select events, 3 other kiosks will be available throughout the building.
D
Designated Drivers
Guests of legal drinking age who hold a valid driver’s license and wish to sign up to be a designated driver, may stop by the Designated Drivers booth sponsored by Coors Light during Pittsburgh Penguins games. In return for safe and sober transportation of their group from PPG Paints Arena, the designated driver will receive a coupon redeemable for a complimentary soft drink during the game.
Designated Drop-Off / Pick-Up
Guests may utilize any of the three main gates of PPG Paints Arena as a temporary drop-off / pick-up location.
Directions
Click here for directions to PPG Paints Arena.
Donation Request
All requests must be made in writing on event/company letterhead a minimum of 4-6 weeks prior to the event date. The request must include date, time and beneficiary of funds raised.
Please send your request by email to info@ppgpaintsarena.com or mail to the address below:
Alyssa Blumling
VP, Marketing
1001 Fifth Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15219
Doors Open
Doors generally open one (1) hour prior to the start of an event at PPG Paints Arena, including Pittsburgh Penguins games. Please check the individual event page for further information. PPG Paints Arena has a no re-entry policy; once you leave the building during an event, you will not be permitted to return.
E
E-Cigarette/ Vapor Cigarette
PPG Paints Arena does not permit the use of E-Cigarettes/Vapor Cigarettes.
Elevators
There are 8 elevators for guests to use throughout the building. Guests will have elevator access available from all main entrances.
Emergency Evacuation
In the event of an emergency, PPG Paints Arena staff will utilize the public address (PA) system to inform guests of the situation and any instructions as applicable. All exits and emergency exits are posted with appropriate signage.
Employment Opportunities
Employment information for PPG Paints Arena is posted on the Employment Opportunities page when available.
Entrances and Exits
There are 4 points of entry into PPG Paints Arena: Peoples Gate (Fifth Avenue and Washington Place), Highmark Gate (Centre Avenue Lower Entrance), F.N.B. Gate (Centre Avenue Upper Entrance), and private parking garage entrance for suite ticket holders for Pittsburgh Penguins games.
Escalators
12 escalators are located throughout the building and lead to all seating levels of PPG Paints Arena
Email Updates
PPG Paints Arena email updates send fans presale opportunities, onsale announcements, special offers and contests. Click here to sign up.
F
Face Coverings
Face covering (costumes, ski masks, etc) are not permitted inside PPG Paints Arena. All guests must remove full face coverings before entering PPG Paints Arena.
PPG Paints Arena Face Covering Policy - COVID 19
In accordance with the Pennsylvania Department of Health guidelines, as of June 28, 2021, guests are no longer required to wear a face covering when attending events at PPG Paints Arena.  Certain events may require specific COVID-19 health protocols; therefore, these policies may be adjusted and will be announced prior to each event.
Facebook
"Like" PPG Paints Arena on Facebook for all the latest news and exclusive giveaways!
Family Restrooms
Family restrooms are available in the following locations:
FedEx Level - 107, 109, 121
PNC Legends Level Suites - 13, 44
Giant Eagle I Snappel Level - 201, 213
People's Gate
Fan Courtesy Policy
PPG Paints Arena is committed to exceeding the expectations of every guest by delivering the best sports and entertainment experience with quality guest service and exceptional value at a world-class venue.
As a means of creating a safe, comfortable and enjoyable experience for all guests, PPG Paints Arena asks for your assistance and compliance with the following:
Abusive or foul language and obscene gestures directed towards other guests, arena employees, players, coaches, performers or officials.
Clothing containing offensive language or indecent graphics.
Intoxication or other signs of impairment related to alcohol or drug consumption.
Banners or signs that obstruct the view of guests, obscure advertising or impede the operations of PPG Paints Arena, contain objectionable subject matter or are commercial in nature.PPG Paints Arena reserves the right to remove any banner or signage at any time.
Prohibited entry items such as containers, food and beverage, air horns, weapons and laser pointers.
Guests entering or attempting to enter restricted areas without proper authorization or credentials.
Throwing objects, either within the seating section or onto the ice or event performance area.
Guest who are disruptive to the event presentation, performance or game.
Guests encountering difficulties and concerns are urged to contact PPG Paints Arena staff immediately.
Guests not abiding by this Fan Courtesy Policy are subject to ejection from PPG Paints Arena and in some cases subject to criminal prosecution.
First Aid
There are two (2) UPMC First Aid Stations, one on each level of PPG Paints Arena. UPMC First Aid is located adjacent to the Guest Services room near Section 104 and behind the concession stand at Section 232.
Food and Beverage
No food or beverages of any kind are permitted to be brought into PPG Paints Arena. Concessions stands located throughout the arena sell a wide variety of food, alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages. Patrons requesting to bring in outside food or beverage due to health conditions should contact customer service in advance at info@ppgpaintsarena.com.
Pennsylvania State Law prohibits the sale of alcohol to all persons under the age of 21. Guests are required to show proper identification and proof of age when purchasing alcoholic beverages.
G
Gift Certificates
Digital gift certificates for PensGear.com, may be purchased here and can only be used online.
Gifts
Gifts for performers are occasionally permitted and accepted at PPG Paints Arena. This is determined on a show-by-show basis.
Group Ticket Sales
PPG Paints Arena and the Pittsburgh Penguins offer group ticket sales to most events and Penguins games. Please contact the following to make arrangements for group ticket discounts and information.
PPG Paints Arena events: For information on group rates and availability, please contact the PPG Paints Arena Group Sales Department at 412-302-0536 or email groupsales@ppgpaintsarena.com. For more information visit Group Sales.
Pittsburgh Penguins hockey games: For information on bringing 10 or more fans to a game or to be placed on the Penguins group mailing list, please call 412-642-PENS or email grouptickets@pittsburghpenguins.com
Guest Services
At most PPG Paints Arena events, Guest Service locations are available on all seating levels. Guest Services kiosks are located behind sections 110, 216 and 234. The Main Guest Services Room is located behind section 104.
Guest Services Texting
Your satisfaction is our ultimate goal! To contact Guest Services with an issue during an event, text GOAL along with your location and issue to 69050 for assistance. Message and data rates may apply.
H
Hotels
Fans can choose from a various downtown hotel accommodations when attending events at PPG Paints Arena. For a complete list of hotels in the surrounding area, please visit Where to Stay.
I
Internships
PPG Paints Arena offers internships for academic and nonacademic credit. For more information on internship opportunities, please visit Job Opportunities.
J
Jobs
Employment information for PPG Paints Arena is posted on the Job Opportunities page when available.
K
TAG-A-KID
In the event a parent and child might get separated at a PPG Paints Arena event, parents can register their child with the Tag-A-Kid program. A wristband with the parent’s seat location and contact number will be given to the child. Registration is available at Guest Services, located near Section 104.
L
Lost and Found
If an item is lost or found during an event please see Guest Services, located near Section 104. Guests inquiring about lost items after an event should call 412-804-7903 and leave a detailed description of the lost item. If the item has been found we will contact you during normal business hours. Items lost at events are held in storage for thirty (30) days and then either disposed of or donated to an appropriate charity.
Lost or Stolen Tickets
For non hockey events, please contact the Box Office at 412-642-1800 for information regarding lost or stolen tickets.
M
Meet and Greet Passes
PPG Paints Arena does not issue or sell meet and greet passes to events. Backstage access is strictly limited and is arranged by tour management.
Merchandise
PensGear, the official team store of the Pittsburgh Penguins, is located in the main lobby of PPG Paints Arena. The entrance for the store is in the Highmark Gate, at the intersection of Centre Avenue and Washington Place.
For merchandise availability and store hours, please call 412-553-8553.
Additionally, Penguins merchandise may be purchased online at www.pensgear.com.
For most non-hockey events, portable merchandise stands are available throughout PPG Paints Arena.
Mobile Ticketing
PPG Paints Arena is a mobile-only facility. For event entry, a mobile ticket must be displayed on a smartphone. For more information about mobile ticketing procedures, please click here.
Why has PPG Paints Arena and the Pittsburgh Penguins gone mobile?
As mobile ticketing becomes more common across multiple industries, we have seen print-at-home usage decline. At the same time, fraud, confusion, and printing issues were frequent with PDF tickets. As a result, to provide a consistent experience to all fans, the decision was made to eliminate PDFs as of July 1, 2018.
As of 2018, in an effort to ensure a ticketing experience that is more convenient, safe and secure for all Penguins fans, 8 ½ x 11 PDF tickets (print-at-home delivery) will no longer be a valid form of entry for PPG Paints Arena events.
How do I access my mobile tickets?
If you purchased through Ticketmaster.com:
-Open your Ticketmaster App or visit Ticketmaster using your mobile device
-Login to your Ticketmaster account and locate the order with your ticket(s)
-Tap the event. A rotating barcode will appear.
-To see the next ticket in your purchase, you must swipe to the left
-At the game or event, a ticket taker will scan each rotating barcode from your mobile device.
If you are a Penguins season ticket holder, received tickets forwarded from a friend or purchased on NHL Ticket Exchange, you can view your tickets on your mobile device through Account Manager. IPhone users are encouraged to store tickets in their Apple Wallet for offline use.
What about Hard Tickets?
Tickets purchased on traditional  TIcketmaster, Pittsburgh Penguins or PPG Paints Arena branded cardstock ARE STILL ACCEPTED as a form of entry into the Arena.
Masks
See Face Coverings
N
News
PPG Paints Arena email updates send fans presale opportunities, onsale announcements, special offers and contests. Click here to sign up.
Nursing Rooms
Nursing mothers are welcome to breastfeed their child whereever they feel most comfortable. Nursing pods and rooms are located behind Sections 117 and 225.
If you require any assistance in locating these rooms, please visit any our Guest Service locations.
O
Operator
For further information about events at PPG Paints Arena, please contact the PPG Paints Arena operator at 412-642-1800.
P
Parent's Room
There is no parent's room available at PPG Paints Arena.
Parking
For more information on parking for PPG Paints Arena events and Pittsburgh Penguins games, please click here.
To check if pre-sold parking is available for your event, click here.
Party Suites
For more information regarding party suite rental, please click here.
Pay Phones
Pay phones are not available in PPG Paints Arena. In case of an emergency, local phone calls may be made using the courtesy phones at Guest Services behind section 104.
PensGear
PensGear, the official team store of the Pittsburgh Penguins, is located inside the Highmark Gate on Centre Avenue. For merchandise availability and store hours, please call 412-553-8553.
Pittsburgh Penguins
PPG Paints Arena is home to the Pittsburgh Penguins. For more information, please visit www.pittsburghpenguins.com
Presales
Certain events at PPG Paints Arena offer presales to our email club members. Click here to sign up.
Prohibited Items
No bags, back packs, air horns, cooler (hard/soft sided), thermoses, large purses, cans, bottles, flasks, alcoholic beverages, laser pointer, video or audio recording devices, professional cameras/lens (including any detachable lens of any kind), laptops, tripods, banners or signs on poles, weapons or any other items deemed dangerous and/or inappropriate.
Medical Bags and diaper bags will be permitted, however, all items must pass thru the xray machines and items that do not pass security must be returned to vehicles.
iPads are permitted for Pittsburgh Penguins Games ONLY.
Public Transportation
For information regarding public transportation to PPG Paints Arena, please click here.
Q
Questions
For general questions please email info@ppgpaintsarena.com or call 412-642-1800.
R
Re-Entry Policy
Exit and re-entry is not permitted at PPG Paints Arena.
Ride Share
PPG Paints Arena’s designated pick-up and drop-off location for ride share is at the corner of Wylie Avenue and Fullerton Street. See more information here.
S
Scalping/ Ticket Reselling
Guests may not re-sell tickets at any price on PPG Paints Area property. To avoid issues with counterfeit, stolen, void or other invalid tickets, tickets should only be purchased from an authorized Ticketmaster outlet or PPG Paints Arena Box Office.
Season Tickets
For information on Pittsburgh Penguins season tickets please click here.
Seating Maps
To locate your seating location within PPG Paints Arena, please view the Seating Chart or check the individual event pages.
Security
In the interest of guest and staff safety, a search process is required for all events in order to prevent guests from bringing unauthorized and prohibited items into the arena.
Service Animals
Service animals that are specifically trained to provide assistance to an individual with a disability are welcome in PPG Paints Arena. All service animals must remain on a leash or in a harness and be under control of the guest with a disability or designee. The service animal must rest in the seating area with the individual and not in the aisle.
Smoking
Smoking is not permitted anywhere in PPG Paints Arena for the safety and consideration of all guests. Exit and re-entry into the building is not permitted.
Solicitation
The distribution of promotional items: flyers, pamphlets, printed materials, as well as the solicitation of signatures, is not permitted on PPG Paints Arena property without proper authorization from management.
Special Announcements
Birthday and anniversary messages can be displayed at Pittsburgh Penguins hockey games only. To have a special announcement displayed click here. All requests must be placed at least forty eight (48) hours prior to each game.
Special Events
For more information to book a special event at PPG Paints Arena, please here click here.
Strollers
Strollers are allowed into PPG Paints Arena. Fold up strollers are preferred due to limited storage space. PPG Paints Arena does not provide any areas for secure drop off of any personal items.
Suites
For information about purchasing suites for Pittsburgh Penguins hockey games and other events, please contact the Penguins Premium Seating Department at 412-642-PENS or email.
T
Taxi
Need a taxi after an event? Call 412-321-8100.
Ticketmaster
For more information regarding Ticketmaster and ticket sales of PPG Paints Arena events, please visit ticketmaster.com.
Tours
Please click here for PPG Paints Arena.
Twitter
See X
U
Umbrellas
Compact umbrellas are permitted into PPG Paints Arena. We ask that umbrellas are able to be placed under your seat and are under the 8"x 5" size limit. All items are subject to searches upon arrivals. Please note this is subject to change the day of the event.
Upgrades
PPG Paints Arena does not provide ticket upgrades. If you would choose to change your seat, a new ticket would have to be purchased at the DICK'S Sporting Goods Box Office.
Uber
See Ride Share.
V
Video Cameras
Use of video or audio recording equipment is strictly prohibited. PPG Paints Arena reserves the right to confiscate any tape or film and remove the patron from the building.
W
Water Bottles
No food or beverages of any kind are permitted to be brought into PPG Paints Arena. Concessions stands located throughout the arena sell a wide variety of food, alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages. Patrons requesting to bring in outside food or beverage due to health conditions should contact guest services in advance at info@ppgpaintsarena.com.
Wheelchairs
A limited number of wheelchairs are available for transporting guests that are disabled to their seating location. Guests can be transported from the gates to their seats. If a wheelchair is needed for the duration of the event, guests must supply their own wheelchairs. Wheelchairs cannot be reserved in advance.
Upon arrival, guests can arrange for a wheelchair at any entrance of PPG Paints Arena. Please see a PPG Paints Arena employee to assist with wheelchair transportation.
Will Call
Tickets ordered or prepaid can be picked up at the DICK'S Sporting Goods Box Office at PPG Paints Arena, located in the lobby. Will Call windows open one hour prior to events and patrons must present valid photo identification when picking up tickets.
X
X
Follow PPG Paints Arena on Twitter for all the latest news and exclusive giveaways!
Y
Youth Ticket Pricing
Select events at PPG Paints Arena offer discounted youth ticket pricing. For availability and rates, please check the individual events page
Z
Zip Code Restrictions
Occasionally a PPG Paints Arena show promoter, in conjunction with Ticketmaster, may elect to restrict presale and day of on sale ticket purchases based on zip code billing addresses in the Pittsburgh metropolitan area (including western Ohio, northern West Virginia and western Maryland). Please check individual event pages for more information.
PPG Paints Arena
Created with Sketch.
1001 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15219 |
412-642-1800
Events & Tickets
Calendar of Events
Event Ticket Info
Pittsburgh Penguins Ticket Information
Group Sales
Seating Charts
Accessibility Accommodations
Tours
Radical Days 2024
PPG Paints Arena
Entrance Gates
News
Fun Facts
FAQs
Food & Beverage Concessions
Stay Connected
Job Opportunities
LEED Gold Certification
Le Magnifique
Contest
Plan Your Visit
Directions & Parking
Public Transportation
Where To Stay
FAQs
A to Z Guide
Know Before You Go
Private Rentals & Partnerships
Corporate Sponsorship
Booking & Rentals
Promoters
Supplier Diversity Program
Premium Seating
Marquee Membership Club
Club Seats
Lexus Loge Boxes
PNC Legends Level Suites
Party Suites
Captain Morgan and F.N.B. Clubs
Lexus Club
_________________________________
Guest Services
FAQs
A to Z Guide
Accessibility Accommodations
Contact Us
Founding Partners
PPG Paints Arena
Created with Sketch.
© 2025			PPG Paints Arena.
|
Site Map |
Terms & Conditions |
Privacy Policy a carbonhouse experience