FAQ - Ticketing
Skip to main content
Pittsburgh Cultural TrustGo to the home page
Click here to go back to the home page
Menu
Calendar
Search
Cart
Tickets & Events
Visual Arts
Educate
Engage
Rent a Space
Visit
About
Donate
Search Pittsburgh Cultural Trust
Search
Calendar
Logout
Login
Promo Code
Cart
Search Pittsburgh Cultural Trust
Search
Close Window
Time Out
You have exceeded the time limit and your seats have been released.
Time left to complete order
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ)
How can I order tickets?
Where can I find more information about Season Tickets and Subscriptions?
Where can I find more information about Group Tickets?
What is your policy regarding ticket resale?
What is Ticket Protection by Booking Protect?
Why can't I print my Print at Home Tickets?
What should I do if I lose my tickets?
What time do theater doors open for a performance?
Is there a dress code for The Trust's theaters?
What is the number for the Lost and Found?
What is the food and drink policy for Cultural Trust theaters?
Are there coat checks?
Is there a contact number I can leave members of my family at home in case of an emergency?
Are your theaters accessible?
Do you offer accommodations for patrons who are hard of hearing?
Do your theaters have elevators?
How are the seats numbered in the theaters?
What is your child seating policy?
What is your bag policy?
Do you sell gift cards?
I received a special offer. How do I access it?
How can I order tickets?
There are many ways to order tickets to Cultural Trust events.
Purchase tickets online at TrustArts.org or CulturalDistrict.org
Call 412-456-6666
Visit the Box Office at Theater Square, 655 Penn Avenue
Learn about the benefits of ordering from the official ticket source >>>
Where can I find more information about Season Tickets and Subscriptions?
Please review our Season Ticket FAQ page.
Where can I find more information about Group Tickets?
Find more Group Ticket information in this FAQ.
What is your policy regarding ticket resale?
As a non-profit organization, the Pittsburgh Cultural Trust is dedicated to making tickets as affordable as possible for all audiences. Tickets purchased from official ticket sources cannot be resold, transferred or distributed to any ticket broker or any other person or entity for resale above the face value of the ticket. Should it come to the Pittsburgh Cultural Trust's attention that a ticket purchaser is a ticket broker, all current and future orders may be cancelled without notice or justification of action. The Pittsburgh Cultural Trust reserves the right to deny admission to any person with a ticket obtained in violation of these terms.
What is Ticket Protection by Booking Protect?
The Pittsburgh Cultural Trust has partnered with Booking Protect to provide you peace of mind with your ticket purchase. We recommend adding Ticket Protection by Booking Protect to your order, as without it all tickets are non-refundable.
Ticket Protection costs just 7% of your order total and allows you to apply for a full refund should you or anyone in your party be unable to attend due to a qualifying reason such as: contracting COVID-19 (with doctor's note), a family member contracting COVID-19 (with doctor's note), being high-risk with the advice of a doctor not to attend (with doctor's note), other illness, family emergency, or inclement weather. More details here.
Claim a refund up to 45 days after your performance date through a simple process exclusively on the Booking Protect website at refund.bookingprotect.com. By adding Ticket Protection to your order, you are agreeing to Booking Protect's Terms of Service here.
Why can't I print my Print at Home Tickets?
Please review our Print at Home Ticket FAQ page.
What should I do if I lose my tickets?
Call 412-456-6666 and we will make duplicates and hold them at our Box Office for pick-up. There is a reprint fee of $2.00 per ticket.
What time do theater doors open for a performance?
The doors to the theater lobbies typically open 1 hour prior to curtain. However, presenters may open the auditorium doors at their discretion.
Is there a dress code for The Trust's theaters?
While many patrons prefer to wear suits and dresses, others dress more casually. Above all, dress comfortably.
What is the number for the Lost and Found?
If you lost or misplaced an item at the Greer Cabaret, please call 412-456-1392. For any of our other theaters or in one of our Galleries, please call our 24 hour campus security desk at 412-456-2610. For lost or misplaced items at the O'Reilly Theater, please call 412-316-8200.
What is the food and drink policy for Cultural Trust theaters?
No outside food or beverages are permitted in our venues. Beverages and snacks are available in all theaters prior to the show and at intermission. Spill-proof containers are available for purchase at most venues to enjoy your refreshments during the performance.
Are there coat checks?
Coat checks are made available to suit weather conditions.
Is there a contact number I can leave members of my family at home in case of an emergency?
You can leave your name, seat location and show you are attending with your babysitter at home with instructions to call these numbers in case of emergency: Benedum Center and Byham Theater: 412-456-2610; Harris Theater: 412-471-9702; O'Reilly Theater: 412-316-8222; Wood Street Galleries: 412-471-5605, Ext. 5
Are your theaters accessible?
We have wheelchair accessible seating and restrooms located on the orchestra level. If you or someone in your party has specific accessibility needs, please contact the Box Office when purchasing tickets. More accessibility information >>>
Do you offer accommodations for patrons who are hard of hearing?
Infrared assistive listening devices are available in all theaters. Ushers can direct you to the guest services location. More accessibility information >>>
Do your theaters have elevators?
The Benedum Center elevator is located to the right of the main lobby and accesses all levels. The Byham Theater elevator is located at the top of the entrance lobby, to the left. Access is provided to the lower lobby (restrooms and coat room), and to the top of the balcony only. The Harris Theater has accessible seating and restroom on the main floor, but does not have an elevator to the second floor balcony or the lower lobby restrooms. The O'Reilly Theater elevator is located to the left of the main entrance lobby and accesses all levels. The Wood Street Galleries elevator accesses all levels.
How are the seats numbered in the theaters?
Benedum and Byham seats are numbered sequentially in the Center sections (101, 102, 103...) but in the Left sections the seats are odd numbers and in the Right sections the seats are even numbers. At the Benedum, for example, the Right Center section starts as follows: 22, 24, 26, etc. The Left Center section starts as follows: 21, 23, 25, etc. Ushers are available at every theater to direct you to your seats.  View seating charts here>>>
What is your child seating policy?
Policies vary per presenter, event and venue. Please review the child policy on your event's information page for show specific information.
All children attending a performance must have a ticket. Tickets may not be purchased for children under the age of 3 years and such children will not be admitted. Any ticket for a child must be for a seat next to the seat occupied by the adult accompanying the child. Children under 12 years must be accompanied by an adult. Children disturbing the enjoyment of other theater patrons may be removed from the venue at the discretion of the theater’s management. No refund will be given.
What is your bag policy?
A guest to a Pittsburgh Cultural Trust venue or event may enter with one bag that is no larger than 16” x 16” x 8”. The definition of a bag includes, but is not limited to, purses, tote bags, duffel bags, suitcases, knapsacks, backpacks, packages, cartons, paper sacks, briefcases, portfolio cases, binocular cases, camera equipment cases, and any other type of device or vessel used for carrying or concealing items. Bags are subject to search and theatergoers may be requested to open their jackets prior to entering. Guests with prohibited items may return them to their vehicles. Unattended items left outside the facility doors will be discarded to ensure patron safety. Read more about Safety & Security measures.
Do you sell gift cards?
Gift cards are available for all shows in the Cultural District in any money denomination. These gift cards can be purchased online, by phone, or in person at the Box Office.
I received a special offer. How do I access it?
If you received a promo code, you can enter it here. Offers without promo codes are accessed by logging into your account and then accessing the My Benefits page.
Tickets & Events
Calendar
Series & Packages
PNC Broadway in Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh Dance Council
Trust Family
Trust Cabaret
Jazz at the Trust
Liberty Magic
Dentons Cohen & Grigsby Trust Presents
Harris Theater
Festivals
Gallery Crawl in the Cultural District
Highmark First Night Pittsburgh
EQT Children's Theater Festival
Dollar Bank Three Rivers Arts Festival
Pittsburgh Humanities Festival
Need 10 or more tickets?
Group Ticket Reservation Form
PNC Broadway in Pittsburgh
Dentons Cohen & Grigsby Trust Presents
Highmark First Night Pittsburgh
Liberty Magic
Pittsburgh Dance Council
Trust Cabaret
Trust Family
Other Cultural District Events
Pittsburgh CLO
Pittsburgh Musical Theater
Pittsburgh Public Theater
FAQ - Group Tickets
Scout Programs
Special Events
Corporate Ticket Offers
Military Tickets
University Student/Faculty Tickets
University Student Tickets
Carnegie Mellon University
Carlow University
Community College of Allegheny County
Chatham University
Duquesne University
La Roche University
Penn State University
Point Park University
Robert Morris University
University of Pittsburgh
Other Universities
Seating Charts
FAQ - Ticketing
FAQ - Season Tickets
FAQ - Mobile Tickets
Gift Cards
Official Ticket Source
Ticket Donations
Venue Tours
Promotional Offers
Join Our Newsletter!
Learn More
Follow Us
Facebook
Twitter
Instagram
Contact Us
Events
Seating Charts
Theaters
Parking & Directions
Galleries
Support
Volunteer
Press Room
About Us
Blog
Administrative Offices:
Pittsburgh Cultural Trust
803 Liberty Avenue
Pittsburgh,
PA
15222
Admin:
412-471-6070
Box Office:
412-456-6666
Privacy Policy
Conditions of Use
Copyright 2025. All rights reserved.