Public Skate
skip navigation
search
UPMC Penguins Rinks
Current Section
Skating
Public Skate
Skate for a Cause
Related Pages
Learn to Skate
Parties
Public Skate
Public Skate
Or Purchase a Pass
Buy 9 get the 10th FREE!
Price - $90
First - purchase your pass under Membership & Passes
Purchase Tickets Here
Online sales will end 1 hr prior to session time.
How to Purchase Tickets
1. Create an account
2. Add family members
3. Select a category on the left
Public skate can be found under Drop-in Events
Scroll to the date you'd like to attend
Purchase your tickets
You can also purchase skate rental
Proceed to checkout
October Schedule
Fun and Fitness For the Entire Family!
Public Skate
Bring your family and friends to the NEW UPMC Lemieux Sports Complex Public Skate! Join us for a fun afternoon or evening of skating. Don't have skates? No problem! We have hockey and figure skates available for rent. All ages! All-skill levels! Great music and light show!
Admission
Fee: $10
Skate Rental $3
Skate Walker $5
Lunch Break Skate Admission $7
Theme Skates
10th Anniversary Skate: Sunday, August 17,                                2:00-4:00pm
Admission Only $5.00!
Come Early
Many sessions will sell out so arrive early to guarantee entrance. We will pre-sell admissions the day of, not earlier. Payment in full is required at the time of reserving tickets.
Public Skate Rules
Patrons must wear skates when on ice
Helmets are not required but are encouraged. Hockey and bike helmets are acceptable.
In the event of an injury, notify a skate guard or rink personnel immediately
Skate at your own risk
No jumps or spins
No more than 2 people can skate together
Skating in a manner that endangers or interferes with other skaters’ safety is prohibited
Roughness, excessive speeding, racing and weaving is prohibited
Skaters are not to carry children or secondary items (cameras, purses)
No headphones allowed
Throwing snowballs or other objects is prohibited
No eating or drinking on the ice
No sitting or accessing penalty boxes or player benches
Please leave ice promptly when horn sounds
This website is powered by SportsEngine's
Sports Relationship Management
(SRM) software, but is owned by and subject to the
UPMC Penguins Rinks privacy policy.
©2025 SportsEngine, Inc.
Privacy Policy
Login