Retention Policy . General Information A gift agreement or statement of intent (the
“gift documentation”) documents the mutual understanding between a donor and the university
in relation to the donor’s charitable contribution. Gift documentation signed by both
the donor and an authorized representative of the university is generally required
for new obligations entered into by the university, both for multi-year commitments
and outright gifts of $20, 000 or more. Examples include, but are not limited to:
new endowed funds; new and/or newly named physical spaces (e. g. , building, facility,
or portion thereof); and new and/or newly named academic units, programs, or centers.
In general, the terms of any gift should be as flexible as possible to permit the
most productive use of the funds over time, while clearly stating the intent of the
donor. All gifts that include a spending restriction (e. g. , endowed funds) need
to be documented with such an agreement. Information appearing in gift documentation
includes, but is not limited to: the dollar amount of the charitable gift/pledge;
the purpose and use of the fund if new and any restrictions; pledge payment schedule;
and recognition, as well as any other requirements or obligations agreed upon by the
donor and the university. To ensure that gifts are used in accordance with the donor’s
philanthropic intent, gifts/pledges not documented by gift documentation signed by
both the donor and an authorized representative of the university, including gifts
of less than $20, 000, generally need to be documented in some other way. For gifts
of less than $20, 000 to currently existing funds, a signed letter of intent, university
gift/pledge form, or similar written or electronic communication from the donor is
generally sufficient documentation. The university will provide donors with a letter
of intent template or gift/pledge form, as appropriate, in those cases. When adding
to an existing fund, no additional specifications on how the money will be spent can
be made. The Vice President for University Advancement, in consultation with the Committee,
as necessary, will make final decisions on all questions related to university gift
documentation. A signed award letter from a foundation or corporation is an acceptable
form of gift documentation if it accepts the terms of the original award proposal
in total and/or documents restrictions on the gift’s designation, use, reporting requirements,
giving vehicle, contribution schedule, recognition, and/or other obligations agreed
upon by the foundation or corporation and the university. If available, the gift award
proposal and other documentation submitted to the foundation or corporation clarifying
the use of the gift must also be attached to the gift record. Language within wills,
trusts, or other estate planning documents can be used to make and place restrictions
on future gifts. However, to help ensure the donor’s philanthropic intentions are
realized and to avoid potential ambiguity, the university’s Office of Gift Planning
strongly recommends that the donor also have gift documentation on file with the university