writers at that time. He defended the genre and deplored a perceived sentiment that
"no one can simultaneously be a respectable writer and understand how a refrigerator
works. "[51] After Player Piano, Vonnegut continued to sell short stories to various
magazines. Contracted to produce a second novel (which eventually became Cat's Cradle),
he struggled to complete it, and the work languished for years. In 1954, the couple
had a third child, Nanette. With a growing family and no financially successful novels
yet, Vonnegut's short stories helped to sustain the family, though he frequently needed
to find additional sources of income. In 1957, he and a partner opened a Saab automobile
dealership on Cape Cod, but it went bankrupt by the end of the year. [55] He designed
a World War II–themed board game called "GHQ" (General Headquarters), but publishers
did not buy it. [56] In 1958, his sister, Alice, died of cancer two days after her
husband, James Carmalt Adams, was killed in a train accident. The Vonneguts took in
three of the Adamses' young sons—James, Steven, and Kurt, aged 14, 11, and 9, respectively.
[57] A fourth Adams son, Peter, age 2, also stayed with the Vonneguts for about a
year before being given to the care of a paternal relative in Georgia. [58] Grappling
with family challenges, Vonnegut continued to write, publishing novels vastly dissimilar
in terms of plot. The Sirens of Titan (1959) features a Martian invasion of Earth
as experienced by a bored billionaire, Malachi Constant. He meets Winston Niles Rumfoord,
an aristocratic space traveler, who is virtually omniscient but stuck in a time warp
that causes him to appear on Earth only every 59 days. The billionaire learns that
his actions and the events of all of history are determined by a race of robotic aliens
from the planet Tralfamadore, who need a replacement part that can only be produced
by an advanced civilization in order to repair their spaceship and return home. Human
history has been manipulated to produce it. Some human structures, such as the Kremlin,
are coded signals from the aliens to their ship as to how long it may expect to wait
for the repair to take place. Reviewers were uncertain what to think of the book,
with one comparing it to Offenbach's opera The Tales of Hoffmann. [59] Rumfoord, who
is based on Franklin D. Roosevelt, physically resembles the former president. Rumfoord
is described this way: he "put a cigarette in a long, bone cigarette holder, lighted
it. He thrust out his jaw. The cigarette holder pointed straight up. "[60] William
Rodney Allen, in his guide to Vonnegut's works, stated that Rumfoord foreshadowed
the fictional political figures who would play major roles in God Bless You, Mr. Rosewater
and Jailbird. [61] Mother Night, published in 1961, received little attention at the
time of its publication. Howard W. Campbell Jr. , Vonnegut's protagonist, is an American