Identical mugs continue to be sold at the Caltech campus store. [175] Life in the
Caltech community is governed by the honor code, which simply states: "No member of
the Caltech community shall take unfair advantage of any other member of the Caltech
community. " This is enforced by a Board of Control, which consists of undergraduate
students, [176] and by a similar body at the graduate level, called the Graduate Honor
Council. [177] The honor code aims at promoting an atmosphere of respect and trust
that allows Caltech students to enjoy privileges that make for a more relaxed atmosphere.
For example, the honor code allows professors to make the majority of exams as take-home,
allowing students to take them on their own schedule and in their preferred environment.
Through the late 1990s, the only exception to the honor code, implemented earlier
in the decade in response to changes in federal regulations, concerned the sexual
harassment policy. Today, there are myriad exceptions to the honor code in the form
of new Institute policies such as the fire policy and alcohol policy. Although both
policies are presented in the Honor System Handbook given to new members of the Caltech
community, some undergraduates regard them as a slight against the honor code and
the implicit trust and respect it represents within the community. [178] In recent
years, the Student Affairs Office has also taken up pursuing investigations independently
of the Board of Control and Conduct Review Committee, an implicit violation of both
the honor code and written disciplinary policy that has contributed to further erosion
of trust between some parts of the undergraduate community and the administration.
[179] As of October 2024, Caltech has 48 Nobel laureates to its name awarded to 26
alumni, 4 postdocs, and 17 non-alumni professors. The 26 alumni include five Caltech
professors (Carl D. Anderson, Linus Pauling, William A. Fowler, Edward B. Lewis, and
Kip Thorne). Among the 17 non-alumni professors, 14 were in residence at Caltech at
the time of the award; David Baltimore, who shared the Prize in Physiology or Medicine
in 1975, became Caltech President in 1997; Renato Dulbecco, who shared the Prize in
Physiology or Medicine in 1975, credited his Prize to the time he had spent at Caltech;
[180] John Hopfield, who won the Prize in Physics in 2024, is the Dickinson Professor
Emeritus at Caltech. [181] The total number of Nobel Prizes is 48 because Pauling
received prizes in both Chemistry and Peace. [182] Eight faculty and alumni have received
a Crafoord Prize from the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, while 58 have been awarded
the U. S. National Medal of Science, and 11 have received the National Medal of Technology.
[4] One alumnus, Stanislav Smirnov, won the Fields Medal in 2010. Other distinguished
researchers have been affiliated with Caltech as postdoctoral scholars (for example,
Barbara McClintock, James D. Watson, Sheldon Glashow and John Gurdon) or visiting
professors (for example, Albert Einstein, Stephen Hawking and Edward Witten). There