Cornell divisions, Weill Cornell Medicine, the university's medical school, and Weill
Cornell Graduate School of Medical Sciences. Since 1927, Weill Cornell has been affiliated
with NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital, one of the nation's largest hospitals. [65] While
Cornell's medical school maintains its own faculty and academic divisions, it shares
administrative and teaching hospital functions with Columbia University Medical Center.
[66] In addition to NewYork-Presbyterian, Cornell's teaching hospitals include Payne
Whitney Clinic in Manhattan and its Westchester Division in White Plains, New York.
[67] Weill Cornell Medical College is affiliated with neighboring Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center, one of the nation's leading cancer centers, Rockefeller University,
and the Hospital for Special Surgery. Many faculty members have joint appointments
at these institutions. Weill Cornell, Rockefeller, and Memorial Sloan–Kettering offer
the Tri-Institutional MD–PhD Program, which is available to selected entering Cornell
medical students. [68] From 1942 to 1979, the Weill Cornell Medical campus also housed
the Cornell School of Nursing. [69] On 19 December 2011, Cornell and Technion – Israel
Institute of Technology in Haifa won a competition for rights to claim free city land
and $100 million in subsidies to build an engineering campus in New York City. The
competition, established by former New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg, was designed
to increase entrepreneurship and job growth in New York City's technology sector.
The winning bid consisted of a 2. 1 million square foot state-of-the-art tech campus
to be built on Roosevelt Island, on the site of the former Coler Specialty Hospital.
The following year, in fall 2012, instruction began at a temporary location at space
donated by Google, located at 111 Eighth Avenue in Manhattan. [70] In 2014, construction
began on the Cornell Tech campus, and the first phase was completed in September 2017.
Thom Mayne of Morphosis Architects was selected to design Cornell Tech's first building.
[71] In addition to the tech campus and medical center, Cornell maintains local offices
in New York City for some of its service programs. The Cornell Urban Scholars Program
encourages students to pursue public service careers, arranging assignments with organizations
working with New York City's poorest children, families, and communities. [73] The
College of Human Ecology and College of Agriculture and Life Sciences enable students
to reach out to local communities by gardening and building with the Cornell Cooperative
Extension. [74] Students om the School of Industrial and Labor Relations' Extension
and Outreach Program make workplace expertise available to organizations, union members,
policymakers, and working adults. [75] The College of Engineering's Operations Research
Manhattan, located in the city's Financial District, brings together business optimization
research and decision support services used in financial applications and public health
logistics planning. [76] In 2015, the College of Architecture, Art, and Planning opened
an 11, 000 square foot, Gensler-designed facility at 26 Broadway in Manhattan's Financial
District. [77] The General Electric Building at 570 Lexington Avenue serves as the
New York City location for over a dozen additional Cornell University programs, including