a degree in computer science. [220] He, along with graduate Matt Hullum, [220] also
founded the Austin-based production company Rooster Teeth, that produces many hit
shows, including the award-winning Internet series, Red vs. Blue. Farrah Fawcett,
one of the original Charlie's Angels, left after her junior year to pursue a modeling
career. Actor Owen Wilson and writer/director Wes Anderson attended the university,
where they wrote Bottle Rocket together, which became Anderson's first feature film.
Writer and producer Charles Olivier is a Longhorn. So too are filmmakers and actors
Mark Duplass and his brother Jay Duplass, key contributors to the mumblecore film
genre. Another notable writer, Rob Thomas graduated with a BA in history in 1987 and
later wrote the young adult novel Rats Saw God and created the series Veronica Mars.
Illustrator, writer and alum Felicia Bond[221] is best known for her illustrations
in the If You Give. .. children's books series, starting with If You Give a Mouse
a Cookie. Taiwanese singer-songwriter, producer, actress Cindy Yen (birth name Cindy
Wu) graduated with double degrees in music (piano performance) and broadcast journalism
in 2008. Noted composer and arranger Jack Cooper received his D. M. A. in 1999 from
the University of Texas at Austin in composition and has gone on to teach in higher
education and become known internationally through the music publishing industry.
Actor Trevante Rhodes competed as a sprinter for the Longhorns and graduated with
a BS in Applied Learning and Development in 2012. In 2016, he starred as Chiron in
the Academy Award- and Golden Globe-winning film Moonlight. Many alumni have found
success in professional sports. Legendary pro football coach Tom Landry attended the
university as an industrial engineering major but interrupted his education after
a semester to serve in the United States Army Air Corps during World War II. Following
the war, he returned to the university and played fullback and defensive back on the
Longhorns' bowl-game winners on New Year's Day of 1948 and 1949. Seven-time Cy Young
Award-winner Roger Clemens entered the MLB after helping the Longhorns win the 1983
College World Series. [222] NBA MVP and four-time scoring champion Kevin Durant entered
the 2007 NBA draft and was selected second overall behind Greg Oden, after sweeping
National Player of the Year honors, becoming the first freshman to win any of the
awards. After becoming the first freshman in school history to lead Texas in scoring
and being named the Big 12 Freshman of the Year, Daniel Gibson entered the 2006 NBA
draft and was selected in the second round by the Cleveland Cavaliers. In his one
year at Texas, golfer Jordan Spieth led the University of Texas Golf club to the NCAA
Men's Golf Championship in 2012 and went on to win The Masters Tournament three years
after leaving the university. [223] Several Olympic medalists have also attended the
school, including 2008 Summer Olympics athletes Ian Crocker (swimming world record