Psychological Association recognized her contribution in 1991 with an Award for Distinguished
Contribution to Psychology in the Public Interest. The citation read: “When homosexuals
were considered to be mentally ill, were forced out of government jobs, and were arrested
in police raids, Evelyn Hooker courageously sought and obtained research support from
the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) to compare a matched sample of homosexual
and heterosexual men. Her pioneering study, published in 1957, challenged the widespread
belief that homosexuality is a pathology by demonstrating that experienced clinicians
using psychological tests widely believed at the time to be appropriate could not
identify the nonclinical homosexual group. This revolutionary study provided empirical
evidence that normal homosexuals existed, and supported the radical idea then emerging
that homosexuality is within the normal range of human behavior. .” —1991 award citation,
psychology. ucdavis. edu/rainbow (accessed Feb. 17, 2012) Sep. 1, 1959: Female Guinea
Pigs Hormonally Manipulated to Act Like Males Scientists treated female guinea pigs
with testosterone while they were fetuses. They found that these guinea pigs did not
display normal female sexual behavior as adults. However, if given testosterone in
adulthood, they would mount other females. This led the authors to conclude that prenatal
androgens could influence mating behavior: “The results are believed to justify the
conclusion that the prenatal period is a time when fetal morphogenic substances have
an organizing or ‘differentiating’ action on the neural tissues mediating mating behavior.
During adulthood, the hormones are activational. ” —“Organizing Action of Prenatally
Administered Testosterone Propionate on the Tissues Mediating Mating Behavior in the
Female Guinea Pig, ” Endocrinology , Sep. 1, 1959 1960–1989 1961: Illinois Becomes
First State to Repeal Law Banning Sodomy “Illinois became the first state in the U.
S. to get rid of its sodomy law. It did so in 1961, when it adopted an overall revision
of its criminal laws. ” —“History of Sodomy Laws and the Strategy that Led Up to Today’s
Decision, ” aclu. org, June 16, 2003 1962: Study Attributes Homosexuality to Detached
Father and Domineering Mother “In 1962, [Irving] Bieber and his colleagues published
Homosexuality: A Psychoanalytic Study . Their work was particularly influential in
its portrayal of a pathogenic family type—a detached and rejecting father and a close-binding
and domineering mother—that presumably led to homosexuality in the 106 adult homosexual
men they studied. Bieber and his colleagues claimed a 27% cure rate of the patients
in their study. ” —“The History of Psychiatry & Homosexuality, ” aglp. org, 2007 1967:
CBS Airs Documentary on Homosexuality In a CBS documentary called The Homosexuals
, Mike Wallace states in the introduction: “In preparing this broadcast, CBS News
commissioned a survey by the Opinion Research Corporation into public attitudes toward
homosexuality. We discovered that Americans consider homosexuality more harmful to
society than adultery, abortion, or prostitution. ” The Homosexuals , youtube. com
(accessed Nov. 21, 2011) 1968: Homosexuality Characterized as a Sexual Deviation In
1968, the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistic Manual of Mental