This section does not apply to liquor given for medicinal purposes to a person under
the age of twenty-one years by a parent, guardian, physician, or dentist. (5) This
section does not apply to liquor given to a person under the age of twenty-one years
when such liquor is being used in connection with religious services and the amount
consumed is the minimal amount necessary for the religious service. (6) This section
does not apply to liquor provided to students under twenty-one years of age in accordance
with a special permit issued under RCW 66. 20. 010(12). (7)(a) A person under the
age of twenty-one years acting in good faith who seeks medical assistance for someone
experiencing alcohol poisoning shall not be charged or prosecuted under subsection
(2)(a) of this section, if the evidence for the charge was obtained as a result of
the person seeking medical assistance. (b) A person under the age of twenty-one years
who experiences alcohol poisoning and is in need of medical assistance shall not be
charged or prosecuted under subsection (2)(a) of this section, if the evidence for
the charge was obtained as a result of the poisoning and need for medical assistance.
” West Virginia July 1, 1986 No exceptions. Wisconsin September 1, 1986 The law includes
the following exceptions: “Any underage person not accompanied by his or her parent,
guardian or spouse who has attained the legal drinking age who knowingly possesses
or consumes alcohol beverages is guilty of a violation. ” “Subject to par. (c), an
underage person may not be issued a citation for, or convicted of, a violation of
sub. (4) (a) or (b) if all of the following apply: 1. The underage person is a crime
victim or bystander and either the crime victim or the bystander requested emergency
assistance, by dialing the telephone number ‘911’ or by other means, in connection
with the alleged crime or the underage person encountered a law enforcement officer
at a medical facility at which the crime victim received treatment in connection with
the alleged crime. 2. The underage person remains at the scene until emergency assistance
arrives and thereafter cooperates with providers of emergency assistance, including
furnishing any requested information, unless the underage person lacks capacity to
cooperate when emergency medical assistance arrives. If the underage person encounters
a law enforcement officer at a medical facility, the underage person cooperates with
the officer and furnishes any requested information, unless the underage person lacks
capacity to cooperate with the officer. (c) Paragraph (b) does not apply to an underage
person who requests emergency assistance, by dialing the telephone number ‘911’ or
by other means, with an intention to claim the protections under par. (b) and knowing
that the fact situation that he or she reports does not exist. ” The law includes
the following exceptions: “Any underage person not accompanied by his or her parent,
guardian or spouse who has attained the legal drinking age who knowingly possesses