Communications Commission (FCC) and FEMA will conduct the test that will happen in
two parts—from the Wireless Emergency Alerts and from the Emergency Alert System.
The Wireless Emergency Alert test will target all consumer cell phones and will display
in either English or in Spanish, depending on individual language settings. Individuals
should expect a message to appear on their phones that will read: 'THIS IS A TEST
of the National Wireless Emergency Alert System. No action is needed. ' The Emergency
Alert System portion of the test will be sent to radios and televisions. The test
message will be similar to the regular monthly Emergency Alert System test messages
with which the public is familiar. It will state: 'This is a nationwide test of the
Emergency Alert System, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, covering
the United States from 14: 20 to 14: 50 hours ET. This is only a test. No action is
required by the public. ' For additional information please visit the FEMA press release
at: https: //www. fema. gov/press-release/20230803/fema-and-fcc-plan-nationwide-emergency-alert-test-oct-4-2023
. ### PITTSBURGH — The Department of Public Safety is informing Pittsburgh residents
of a scheduled nationwide test of the Emergency Alert System and Wireless Emergency
Alerts across all wireless and electronic devices. The alert will take place at approximately
2: 20pm Eastern Time on Wednesday, October 4, with a back-up test date of October
11. The purpose of the test is to warn the public about emergencies, particularly
those on the national scale, and to ensure that the systems that are in place continue
to be effective. The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and FEMA will conduct
the test that will happen in two parts—from the Wireless Emergency Alerts and from
the Emergency Alert System. The Wireless Emergency Alert test will target all consumer
cell phones and will display in either English or in Spanish, depending on individual
language settings. Individuals should expect a message to appear on their phones that
will read: 'THIS IS A TEST of the National Wireless Emergency Alert System. No action
is needed. ' The Emergency Alert System portion of the test will be sent to radios
and televisions. The test message will be similar to the regular monthly Emergency
Alert System test messages with which the public is familiar. It will state: 'This
is a nationwide test of the Emergency Alert System, issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, covering the United States from 14: 20 to 14: 50 hours ET. This
is only a test. No action is required by the public. ' For additional information
please visit the FEMA press release at: https: //www. fema. gov/press-release/20230803/fema-and-fcc-plan-nationwide-emergency-alert-test-oct-4-2023
. ### 3/10/2023 17: 29: 36 Department of Public Safety Honors Retiring Medical Director
Dr. Ronald Roth with Proclamation Ceremony PITTSBURGH — The City of Pittsburgh Department
of Public Safety today celebrated the long and storied career of Dr. Ronald Roth at
a proclamation ceremony. For over 21 years, Dr. Roth served as the Medical Director