The unidentified patient was transported to the hospital in critical condition where
he was later pronounced deceased. The other two jumpers were rescued and safely pulled
to the river's edge. Medics evaluated them at the scene. They were not injured. These
two men were detained by police for questioning. Upon further investigation, it was
determined the three men were not trying to take their own lives. At this time, there
are no charges in this ongoing investigation. 29/7/2018 23: 47: 53 UPDATE: Department
of Defense Training Continues in Pittsburgh Region PITTSBURGH, PA (August 1, 2018)
-- The Department of Defense and the City of Pittsburgh would like to thank the public
for its support of our military and local first responders as they continue training
exercises in and around the greater Pittsburgh area. The exercises, which involve
local and federal law enforcement, play an important role in keeping our nation safe
by providing unique training opportunities for our military. In addition, local law
enforcement and first responders are receiving invaluable training from the DOD during
these exercises, which will conclude tomorrow night, August 2. Public Safety officials
have received comments and inquiries directly from residents and on social media,
most of which have been overwhelmingly positive and supportive. However, we have also
received messages from concerned residents who were alarmed by the exercises, either
because they were unaware of them occurring here or because their homes are in close
proximity to certain training areas. Public Safety is doing its best to respond to
each individual who expresses such concerns. We understand that for some this can
be an inconvenience, and we again thank everyone for their understanding and support.
By accommodating these exercises, we are providing a great service to our country.
“I’d like to thank the public for their understanding and support, ” Public Safety
Director Wendell Hissrich said. “This is a collaborative effort between us and the
D. O. D. We understand the training for the most part this week is taking place at
night and that is an inconvenience to some, not only in the city but in the suburbs.
But I want to emphasize our thanks to the public. ” As a reminder, these are planned
exercises in cooperation with local authorities and they are not in response to any
current events. To maintain the highest level of safety, there are no public viewing
or media opportunities planned during this event. PITTSBURGH, PA (August 1, 2018)
-- The Department of Defense and the City of Pittsburgh would like to thank the public
for its support of our military and local first responders as they continue training
exercises in and around the greater Pittsburgh area. The exercises, which involve
local and federal law enforcement, play an important role in keeping our nation safe
by providing unique training opportunities for our military. In addition, local law
enforcement and first responders are receiving invaluable training from the DOD during