with the team winning just 23 games. As in the 1980s, the Penguins' struggles were
fortuitously concurrent with a string of NHL entry draft classes that would yield
multiple world-class talents. The Penguins lost out on the first overall pick for
the 2004 NHL entry draft (Alexander Ovechkin), which went to the Washington Capitals.
However, Ovechkin's countryman, center Evgeni Malkin, was similarly highly regarded,
and Pittsburgh took him with the second overall pick. However, a transfer dispute
between the NHL and the International Ice Hockey Federation (IIHF) delayed his Pittsburgh
debut. [22] By this point, the Penguins had collapsed financially since the Stanley
Cup-winning years of the early 1990s. Their home venue, the Civic Arena, had become
the oldest arena in the NHL, and Lemieux had tried unsuccessfully to cut a deal with
the city for a new facility. With Pittsburgh uninterested in building a new hockey
arena for the struggling Penguins, Lemieux began looking into the possibilities of
selling or relocating the team to Kansas City, Missouri. [23][24][25][26] A lockout
prompted the cancellation of the 2004–05 NHL season. One of the many reasons for the
lockout included disagreements on resolving the financial struggles of teams like
the Penguins and the Ottawa Senators, which had filed for bankruptcy protection. [27]
During the lockout, the Penguins' players dispersed between the club's American Hockey
League (AHL) affiliate, the Wilkes-Barre/Scranton Penguins, and to European leagues.
[6] With the lockout resolved in 2005, the NHL organized an unprecedented draft lottery
to set the 2005 NHL entry draft selection order. The draft lottery, which was held
behind closed doors in a "secure location", resulted in the Penguins being awarded
the first overall pick. [28][29][30] Quebec Major Junior Hockey League (QMJHL) superstar
Sidney Crosby (who had been training with Lemieux over the summer)[28] was the consensus
first overall pick, with many referring to the draft lottery process as "The Sidney
Crosby Sweepstakes". The Penguins selected Crosby on July 30, 2005, with the top pick,
instantly rekindling interest in hockey in Pittsburgh. [11] The Penguins began rebuilding
the team under the salary cap. However, Evgeni Malkin, the Penguins' 2004 draft pick,
could not report to Pittsburgh immediately because of a playing rights dispute with
the Russian Superleague. The addition of Crosby paid instant dividends, with attendance
rising by approximately 4, 000 per game on average in the 2005–06 season. [19] However,
Crosby's presence did not immediately translate into wins, as the team began the season
with a long winless skid that resulted in a head coaching change from Olczyk to Michel
Therrien. Then, on January 24, 2006, Lemieux announced his second retirement, after
developing an irregular heartbeat, this time permanently. He finished as the NHL's
seventh all-time scorer (1, 723), eighth in goals (690) and tenth in assists (1, 033),
and with the second-highest career points per game average (1. 88), which is second
to Wayne Gretzky's 1. 92. [31][32] Despite the team's struggles, Crosby established