goes on a mission to catch them. Harris Theater Pittsburgh Cultural Trust Afghan youth
craft wooden skis to compete in a mountain race uniting rival villages before their
country's collapse, showing resilience and community spirit in an unexpected story
of hope and triumph. Harris Theater Pittsburgh Cultural Trust A loving father (David
Strathairn) grapples with how to protect his daughter-in-law (Jane Levy) when he discovers
that his son is having an affair in a sensitive and searching portrait of a Southern
family. Harris Theater Pittsburgh Cultural Trust Beineix’s legendarily thriller returns
to the big screen in a sparkling new restoration. In Paris, music lover Jules finds
himself on the run from drug dealers, music pirates and the cops after obtaining a
recording a never-before-taped opera star. Harris Theater Pittsburgh Cultural Trust
From its humble beginnings as a London fringe play to its rise, fall, and triumphant
return as the biggest cult film of all time, this documentary tells the definitive
story of The Rocky Horror Show, released in theaters 50 years ago. Harris Theater
Pittsburgh Cultural Trust Bill Banowski’s fascinating film is takes us into the life
and work of cartoonist Patrick Oliphant, whose politics and cartoons are simply the
most skilled, brilliant, biting, and indeed savage ever devised. Harris Theater Pittsburgh
Cultural Trust Juxtaposing images from George Orwell’s life against chilling archival
and contemporary footage of political violence, social unrest, and global warfare,
ORWELL: 2+2 = 5 underscores how prophetic his literary warnings about totalitarianism
were. Harris Theater Pittsburgh Cultural Trust Actor-turned-filmmaker Harris Dickinson
(Triangle of Sadness, Babygirl) makes his directorial debut with Urchin, a raw yet
deeply compassionate and surprisingly buoyant portrait of life on society’s margins.
Harris Theater Pittsburgh Cultural Trust Checkpoint Zoo documents a daring rescue
led by a heroic team of zookeepers and volunteers who risked their lives to save thousands
of animals trapped in a zoo behind enemy lines during the Russian invasion of Ukraine.
Harris Theater Pittsburgh Cultural Trust One evening in March 1943, legendary lyricist
Lorenz Hart (Ethan Hawke) confronts his shattered self-confidence in Sardi’s bar as
his former collaborator Richard Rodgers celebrates the opening night of his ground-breaking
hit musical “Oklahoma! ”. Harris Theater Pittsburgh Cultural Trust Released 50 years
ago, the most terrifying and infamous cinematic road trip once again takes a horrifying
turn when a group of friends is thrust into a rural nightmare, hunted by a chainsaw-wielding
killer and his disturbed family. Harris Theater Pittsburgh Cultural Trust Alexandre
O. Philippe’s expansive documentary celebrates five decades of The Texas Chain Saw
Massacre, examining its legacy via extended interviews with five influential luminaries
of the horror genre. Harris Theater Pittsburgh Cultural Trust Host Sean Collier will
tell you all about our surprise flick, while the mysterious Dr. Gielgud returns with
in-theater scares and pre-show surprises — but which Dr. Gielgud will we meet this
time? Harris Theater Pittsburgh Cultural Trust Don’t miss this special screening of
the world’s first vampire movie, F. W. Murnau’s 1922 classic, Nosferatu, featuring