abolished university fees. This increased the university participation rate. In 1974,
the Commonwealth assumed full responsibility for funding higher education (i. e. ,
universities and Colleges of Advanced Education (CAEs)) and established the Commonwealth
Tertiary Education Commission (CTEC), which had an advisory role and responsibility
for allocating government funding among universities. However, in 1975, in the context
of a federal constitutional political crisis and economic recession, triennial funding
of universities was suspended. Demand remained with growth redirected to CAEs and
State-controlled TAFE colleges. By the mid-1980s, the method by which fees were re-introduced
proved to be a system accepted by both Federal political parties and consequently
still in place today. The system is known as the Higher Education Contribution Scheme
(HECS) and enables students to defer payment of fees until after they commence professional
employment, and after their income exceeds a threshold level – at that point, the
fees are automatically deducted through income tax. By the late 1980s, the Australian
tertiary education system was still a three-tier system, composed of: However, by
this point, the roles of the universities, institutes of technology and the CSIRO
had also become blurred. [citation needed] Institutes of technology had moved from
their traditional role of undergraduate teaching and industry-consulting towards conducting
pure and applied research. They also had the ability to award degrees through to Doctor
of Philosophy (PhD) level. For a number of reasons, including clarifying the role
of institutes of technology, the Federal Minister for Education of the time (John
Dawkins) created the unified national system, which compressed the former three-tier
tertiary education system into a two-tier system. This required a number of amalgamations
and mergers between smaller tertiary institutions, and the option for institutes of
technology to become universities. As a result of these reforms, institutes of technology
disappeared and were replaced by a collection of new universities. By the early 1990s,
the two-tier tertiary education was in place in Australia – university education and
Technical and Further Education (TAFE). By the early years of the new millennium,
even TAFE colleges were permitted to offer degrees up to bachelor's level. The 1980s
also saw the establishment of Australia's first private university, Bond University.
Founded by businessman Alan Bond, this Gold Coast institution was granted its university
status by the Queensland government in 1987. For the most part, up until the 1990s,
traditional Australian universities had focused upon pure, fundamental, and basic
research rather than industry or applied research – a proportion of which had been
well supported by the CSIRO which had been set up for this function. [citation needed]
Australians had performed well internationally in pure research, having scored almost
a dozen Nobel Prizes[29] as a result of their participation in pure research. In the
1990s, the Hawke/Keating Federal Government sought to redress the shortcoming in applied
research by creating a cultural shift in the national research profile. [citation
needed] This was achieved[citation needed] by introducing university scholarships