The team split its home schedule between Green Bay and Milwaukee from 1933 to 1994, although most home games during that time were played in Green Bay. Of the games played in Milwaukee, the majority were played at County Stadium. [154] However, by 1991, the Packers claimed that revenue from the Milwaukee games were 60% of the revenue generated from the Green Bay games, and Milwaukee officials did not act upon the Packers' request that County Stadium be replaced with an updated stadium. [155] The Packers' longtime flagship station is Milwaukee-based WTMJ AM 620. [156] Milwaukee also has a strong history of nonprofessional sports dating back to the 19th century. Abraham Lincoln watched cricket in Milwaukee in 1849 when he attended a game between Chicago and Milwaukee. In 1854, the Milwaukee Cricket Club had 150 members. [157] Milwaukee was the host city of the International Cycling Classic, which included the men's and women's Superweek Pro Tour races, featuring cyclists and teams from across the United States and more than 20 other countries. [citation needed] Milwaukee is known for its well-developed Milwaukee County Parks system. [158] The "Grand Necklace of Parks", designed by famed landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted, includes Lake Park and Bradford Beach, River Park (now Riverside Park), and West Park (now Washington Park). Milwaukee County Parks offer facilities for sunbathing, picnics, grilling, disc golf, and ice skating. [159] Milwaukee has over 140 parks with over 15, 000 acres (6, 100 ha) of parks and parkways. During the summer months, Cathedral Park in downtown Milwaukee hosts "Jazz in the Park" on Thursday nights. [160] Nearby Pere Marquette Park hosts "River Rhythms" on Wednesday nights. The Milwaukee Riverwalk is a continuous pedestrian walkway along the Milwaukee River containing art displays, cafés and restaurants. [161] It extends from the Historic Third Ward district to Caesars Park near Brady Street. It also links to the Hank Aaron State Trail, Lakeshore State Park, and Erie Street Plaza. [162] The Hank Aaron State Trail is a 15. 2-mile (24. 5 km) shared-use path that travels east-west between Lakeshore State Park to Wauwatosa via the Menomonee Valley. [163] Lakeshore State Park consists of 22 acres (8. 9 ha) on the shores of Lake Michigan. [164] It is situated adjacent to both Discovery World and Henry Maier Festival Park. [165][166] It is the only urban state park in Wisconsin and features restored prairie and a pebble beach. [164] In addition to the prairie, portions of the park are planted with Kentucky bluegrass. [citation needed] Milwaukee's parks are home to several nature centers. Mitchell Park Horticultural Conservatory is composed of three beehive-shaped glass domes that span 140 feet (43 m) in diameter and are 85 feet (26 m) high. They are properly referred to as the world's first conoidal domes. [167] They cover 45, 000 square feet (4, 200 m2) of display area and were constructed in stages from 1959 to 1967. The conservatory includes the Tropical Dome, the Arid Dome and the Show Dome, which hosts four seasonal (cultural, literary, or historic) shows and one Christmas-themed exhibit held annually in December for visitors to enjoy. The Urban Ecology Center offers programming for adults and children from its three branches located in Riverside Park, Washington Park, and the Menomonee Valley (near Three Bridges Park). [168] The Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources operates a nature center at Havenwoods State Forest. [169] The city is also served by two nearby suburban nature centers. Wehr Nature Center is operated by Milwaukee County in Whitnall Park, spread across Franklin, Greendale and Hales Corners. Admission is free, and parking costs $5 per vehicle. [170] The Schlitz Audubon Nature Center in Bayside, Wisconsin, charges admittance fees for visitors. [171] The Monarch Trail, on the Milwaukee County Grounds in Wauwatosa, is a 1. 25-mile (2 km) trail that highlights the fall migration of the monarch butterflies. [172] Milwaukee Public Market, in the Third Ward neighborhood, is an indoor market that sells produce, seafood, meats, cheeses, vegetables, candies, and flowers from local businesses. It opened in 2005 and drew inspiration from Pike Place Market in Seattle, envisioning a space to support local vendors. [173] Milwaukee County Farmers Markets, held in season, sell fresh produce, meats, cheeses, jams, jellies, preserves and syrups, and plants. Farmers markets also feature artists and craftspeople. Locations include: Aur Farmers Market, Brown Deer Farmers Market, Cudahy Farmers Market, East Town Farm Market, Enderis Park Farmers Market, Fondy Farmers Market, Mitchell Street Market, Riverwest Gardeners' Market, Silver Spring Farmers Market, South Milwaukee Farmers Market, South Shore Farmers Market, Uptown Farmers Market, Wauwatosa Farmers Market, West Allis Farmers Market, and Westown Market on the Park. Milwaukee has a mayor-council form of government. With the election of Mayor John O. Norquist in 1988, the city adopted a cabinet form of government with the mayor appointing department heads not otherwise elected or appointed—notably the Fire and Police Chiefs. While this gave the mayor greater control of the city's day-to-day operations, the Common Council retains almost complete control over the city's finances and the mayor, with the exception of his proposed annual budget, cannot directly introduce legislation. The Common Council consists of 15 members, one from each district in the city. [citation needed] Milwaukee has a history of giving long tenures to its mayors; from Frank Zeidler to Tom Barrett, the city had only four elected mayors (and one acting) in a 73-year period. [174] When 28-year incumbent Henry Maier retired in 1988, he held the record for longest term of service for a city of Milwaukee's size, [citation needed] and when Barrett retired in 2021, he was the longest-serving mayor of any of the United States' 50 largest cities. [175] In addition to the election of a Mayor and Common Council on the city level, Milwaukee residents elect county representatives to the Milwaukee County Board of Supervisors, as well as a Milwaukee County Executive. The current County Executive is David Crowley. [citation needed] Milwaukee has been a Democratic stronghold for more than a century at the federal level. [176] At the local level, Socialists often won the mayorship and (for briefer periods) other city and county offices during much of the first sixty years of the 20th century. The city is split between seven State Senate districts, each of which is divided between three state Assembly districts. All but four state legislators representing the city are Democrats; the four Republicans—two in the State Assembly and two in the State Senate—represent outer portions of the city that are part of districts dominated by heavily Republican suburban counties. In 2008, Barack Obama won Milwaukee with 77% of the vote. [177] Tim Carpenter (D), Lena Taylor (D), Robyn Vining (D), LaTonya Johnson (D), Chris Larson (D), Alberta Darling (R), and Dave Craig (R) represent Milwaukee in the State Senate; Daniel Riemer (D), JoCasta Zamarripa (D), Marisabel Cabrera (D), David Bowen (D), Jason Fields (D), LaKeshia Myers (D), Sara Rodriguez (D), Dale P. Kooyenga (R), Kalan Haywood (D), David Crowley (D), Evan Goyke (D), Jonathan Brostoff (D), Christine Sinicki (D), Janel Brandtjen (R), and Mike Kuglitsch (R) represent Milwaukee in the State Assembly. Milwaukee makes up the overwhelming majority of Wisconsin's 4th congressional district. The district is heavily Democratic,