that this number was added into the score later. "Beautiful City" was written in 1972
as part of the film and re-written in 1993 after the Rodney King riots in Los Angeles.
In the film, it follows "Alas for You" and "By My Side", omitting the parable typically
found in between these two numbers. In the decades following the film's release, many
directors have chosen to use the lyrics from the original film version, sometimes
to replace the "Day by Day" reprise, "Tower of Babble", like the prologue, or adding
it the end of the musical as an additional scene depicting the Resurrection. The 2011
Broadway revival places "Beautiful City" after "We Beseech Thee" and just before the
Last Supper, sung by Jesus as a slow ballad. This production used the revised 1993
lyrics and is included on its cast recording, along with a cover by John Ondrasik
of Five For Fighting as a bonus track. Some productions use both the original upbeat
film version as a prologue as well as the ballad version, either in its original place
just before the Last Supper whereupon the "Day by Day" reprise is used as the Resurrection,
or as an epilogue depicting the resurrection itself. In Music Theatre International's
Broadway Junior series, which edits popular musicals to one act appropriate for a
middle school cast, "Beautiful City" is included in the show. Godspell Junior contains
most of the first act and almost none of the second act. "By My Side" is omitted entirely.
"Beautiful City" is placed at the beginning of the second act and is immediately followed
by the Last Supper, the Betrayal, and the Crucifixion. John-Michael Tebelak wrote
the first version of Godspell as his master's thesis at Carnegie Mellon University.
The Carnegie Mellon cast included (listed in speaking order): Andrew Rohrer, Mary
Mazziotti, Martha Jacobs, Robin Lamont, Robert Miller, Sonia Manzano, Stanley King,
Randy Danson, James Stevens, and David Haskell with original music by Duane Bolick.
[14] Ted Danson has mentioned that he was cast in this original production on several
occasions but had to leave the production due to a case of Bell's palsy. [15][16]
This version was performed at Carnegie Mellon in 1970 by students from Carnegie Mellon's
Theatre Department. The show was then brought to the attention of producers Edgar
Lansbury (brother of Angela Lansbury), Joseph Beruh, and Stuart Duncan by Carnegie
Mellon alumnus and associate producer Charles Haid, who wanted to transfer the show
to off-Broadway. [17] The show was first produced at La Mama as a play with original
music for eight songs by Duane Bolick, Jeffrey Mylett, who added one of his songs
("The Raven and The Swan") and Peggy Gordon and Jay Hamburger, who added "By My Side".
The producers then hired Stephen Schwartz, another Carnegie Mellon alumnus, to re-score
the show. Schwartz's score incorporated a variety of musical genres, including pop,
folk rock, gospel, and vaudeville. "By My Side", written by Carnegie Mellon students