Celebrating CMU Impact and Innovation
Carnegie Mellon’s 125th anniversary year is a unique opportunity for the Tartan community to honor the university’s legacy of impact and innovation and look forward to its next chapter of world-changing discovery and transformation. Please join us at events throughout the year to explore how CMU is delivering progress for people where we all live, work and learn.
Raj Reddy Artificial Intelligence Lecture with Torsten Hoefler
Thursday, Oct. 9, 5-6 p.m. Rashid Auditorium, Gates Hillman 4401
CMU Professor of Computer Science and Director of Scalable Parallel Computer Lab Torsten Hoefler presents “From Large Language Models to Reasoning Language Models - Three Eras in The Age of Computation,” an exploration of the evolution of Large Language Models (LLMs). The Raj Reddy Artificial Intelligence Lecture Series was established in honor of Raj Reddy and his critical work in AI during his 50-year career at CMU.
Registration is now closed.
The CMU Student Experience: A Conversation with Gina Casalegno
Tuesday, Oct. 21, 5:30-7 p.m. Old Ebbitt Grill, Washington D.C. Carnegie Mellon University Vice President for Student Affairs and Dean of Students Gina Casalegno offers an engaging discussion on CMU’s evolving student experience. Moderated by CMU Trustee Shalini Ray (MCS 2015; HNZ 2016), the conversation will explore topics from the intersection of wellness and athletics to new approaches in student support, highlighting how the university’s holistic, inclusive environment empowers Tartans to thrive in all aspects of their lives.
University Lecture Series: The Carl & Amy Jones Lecture in Interdisciplinary Science
Wednesday, Oct. 22, 5-6:30 p.m. McConomy Auditorium, First Floor, CUC
Eyewire executive director and neuroscience designer Amy Robinson Sterling presents “Visualizing Minds and Meanings, An Interdisciplinary Adventure in Neuroscience.” The Carl & Amy Jones Lecture in Interdisciplinary Science is part of CMU’s efforts to support interdisciplinary study at the university.
Room to Imagine: 125 Years of Carnegie Mellon University
Tuesday, Nov. 4-Saturday, Nov. 8, 8-3 a.m., and Sunday, Nov. 9, Noon-3 a.m. Hunt Library Gallery
“Room to Imagine” is an exhibit that transforms the familiar college dorm room into a showcase of Carnegie Mellon innovation, revealing how CMU breakthroughs permeate our daily lives. Step into this immersive space and discover the extraordinary connections between everyday objects and world-changing discoveries.
No registration required.
CMU, CAPTCHA, reCAPTCHA, and Duolingo President’s Lecture Series: 125th Anniversary Kickoff
T hursday, Nov. 6, 4-6 p.m. Simmons Auditorium, Tepper Building
President Jahanian established the President’s Lecture Series to engage and inspire the Carnegie Mellon community on issues of emerging and preeminent relevance to society. This special installment will feature CEO and co-founder of Duolingo and CMU alumnus Luis von Ahn. Following the speaking program, enjoy light fare, photo opportunities and mingling with Tartan community members.
Beyond the Intersection of Art and Technology
Friday, Nov. 7, 4-6 p.m., and Saturday, Nov. 8, 10 a.m.-Noon IDeATe Studios A & B, First Floor, Hunt Library
The Integrative Design, Arts and Technology network showcases student projects that push past convention — encouraging new ways of imaging and making.
No registration required.
Hands-On: Cake & Crafts, a 125th Birthday Celebration with the University Archives
Friday, Nov. 7; 4-6 p.m., and Saturday, Nov. 8, 10 a.m.-Noon IDeATe Studios A & B, First Floor, Hunt LIbrary
Celebrate 125 years of Carnegie Mellon University with cake, crafts and a journey through campus life across the decades. The University Archives will showcase treasured pieces from their collection, highlighting student organizations and cherished traditions alongside retro artifacts and athletic memorabilia. Enjoy a slice of cake and a slice of history as you explore the stories that shaped our campus community.
No registration required.
75th Annual Alumni Awards Ceremony and Reception
Saturday, Nov. 8; 6:30-9 p.m. Ceremony: Kresge Theatre, CFA Building Reception: Alumni Concert Hall and Great Hall, CFA Building
The CMU Alumni Association proudly honors members of the CMU community who have made an impact on their industries, their communities, their alma mater and others' lives around the world.
CMU125: The Power of Possibilities Tour NYC
Thursday, Dec. 4; 6:30-9 p.m. Times Center, New York, NY
During this special New York City event, you can learn about Carnegie Mellon’s inspiring vision for the future and how this community is building the next 125 years of innovation and impact.
Registration coming soon.