Publications + Social Media
As your guide to Downtown Pittsburgh, the PDP works hard to keep you in the know about all of the exciting events going on Downtown through publications, via our social media, and especially through our weekly e-newsletters.
Social Media
Follow us @downtownpitt on Facebook , Twitter , Instagram , and LinkedIn ! Share what you love with us by tagging your photos with #DowntownPittsburgh.
Weekly Newsletter: The Low DownTown
The Low DownTown features news and previews of the upcoming week’s events in Downtown and comes out every Thursday. Subscribe today and be in-the-know of all the cool happenings around the Golden Triangle!
If you would like to submit an upcoming event for review, be sure to email pdp@downtownpittsburgh.com by 5:00 p.m. on Tuesday to be considered in the following week’s issue.
To browse previous editions , click here .
Annual Report
The PDP’s Annual Meeting brings together community and business leaders, residents, and employees to inspire conversation and action that supports a more resilient and vibrant Downtown. Learn more and read the report.
State of Downtown Pittsburgh Report
The State of Downtown Pittsburgh snapshot reports are produced by the PDP to dive deeply into specific topical areas, giving meaning to data, statistics, and trends for use by the general public. A detailed resource for landowners, developers, investors, and community leaders to showcase the economic vitality of Downtown Pittsburgh, each report will focus on an important topical area.
Downtown Pittsburgh Made Easy Guide
A must-have for your Downtown travels: This convenient, pocket-sized guide provides you with information on walking, biking, public transportation, attractions, business destinations, and more.
Click here to download the PDF version for printing or bringing with you on your smartphone or tablet.
Contact us to request physical copies.
* If you’re outside the Golden Triangle and are requesting more than 50 guides, please arrange to pick them up at our office. We can mail them to you, however, there will be a fee associated with the mailing.
At the PDP, we make every effort to provide the most current data in our Downtown Guides. To report corrections, please call us at (412) 566-4190, or send corrections to PDP@DowntownPittsburgh.com .