Parking
ADA compliant parking is available in our Reynolds Street parking lot both near The Frick Art Museum and the Grable Visitors' Center.
Navigating the Site
Visiting the various museums on site requires moving from building to building throughout our 10-acre campus. (View a site map here .) Tours of Clayton require walking from the Grable Visitor Center to Clayton, where a lift is available for first floor access. Estimated walk times from the Grable Visitor Center to buildings on the Frick site follow:
Grable Visitor Center to The Frick Art Museum: estimated walk time 2 – 4 minutes
Grable Visitor Center to Education Center: estimated walk time 1 minute
Grable Visitor Center to Car and Carriage Museum: estimated walk time 1 minute
Grable Visitor Center to The Café at The Frick:  estimated walk time 1 – 2 minutes
Grable Visitor Center to Greenhouse : estimated walk time 1 – 2 minutes
Grable Visitor Center to Clayton:  estimated walk time 3 – 5 minutes
Wheelchairs and Motorized Scooters
A drop off area for wheelchairs is located along Homewood Avenue, near the Car and Carriage Museum. Wheelchair accessible buildings include The Frick Art Museum, the Café, the Car and Carriage Museum, the Grable Visitor Center, the Education Center, and the first floor of Clayton. We also welcome personal wheelchairs, walkers, and motorized scooters. Please note that motorized scooters greater than 30" wide cannot navigate the doorways of Clayton. A narrated video tour of Clayton’s second floor is provided for visitors unable to visit the second floor. Wheelchairs are available for visitor use on a first-come, first-served basis at the Grable Visitor Center, The Frick Art Museum and the Car and Carriage Museum.
Restrooms
Accessible restrooms are available in the Grable Visitor Center, The Frick Art Museum, the Car and Carriage Museum and the Education Center. Restrooms are not available in Clayton. Private all gender restrooms are located in the Grable Visitor Center, the Education Center, and the Café. Opened in April of 2024, the Frick Art Museum now features an Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)-compliant restroom — an all-gender accessible family space intended to better serve Frick visitors of all ages, identities, and abilities
Doors
Power-assist doors can be found at the Frick Art Museum, the Grable Visitor Center, the Car and Carriage Museum, and the Community Room.
Families
New at the Frick, the Scott Family Infant Care Room was designed as a space for caregivers to tend to their young children during their visit in comfort and privacy. Located in the Grable Visitor Center, the Scott Family Infant Care Room is decorated cheerfully with custom wallpaper designed by local artist Clinton van Gemert, and features a cozy armchair, white noise machine, changing table, and toys for little ones to enjoy.
Baby changing stations are located in the Grable Visitor Center, The Frick Art Museum and the Car and Carriage Museum.
Strollers are welcome in all buildings on site except Clayton.
Service Animals
Service animals are permitted in all public areas of the museum. Service animals are trained to perform specific tasks for an individual with a disability as defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act. Comfort animals, therapy animals, companion animals, or emotional support animals are not service animals as defined by the ADA and are not allowed. The ADA guidelines regarding service animals can be accessed here.
Aides
Professional aides accompanying visitors are admitted to Clayton and to ticketed exhibitions at no charge (one aide per guest). To make a reservation for a professional aide, please call us at 412-371-0600 in advance of your visit.
Sign Language
American Sign Language interpreters are available at no charge for tours and programs with advance notice to ensure availability. Requests for an ASL interpreter must be made at least two weeks in advance of the date of the visit by contacting Dalena Collins, Learning and Interpretive Coordinator, at 412-342-4087 or dcollins@thefrickpittsburgh.org .  Payment for the tour or program must be made in advance.
Large Print
Large print labels are available for visitors to special exhibitions.  Labels can be requested at the admissions desk in The Frick Art Museum.
Membership
The Frick offers an ADA Membership for $30 per year for one person and one aide. For a full list of benefits or to join, visit our Membership page here or call the membership office at 412-342-4086 or email us .