Bachelor of Science Additional Major Accelerated Master’s Program Minor
The Bachelor of Science in Robotics teaches students how to create, program, and use robotics to solve real world problems. It is an interdisciplinary program taught from the computer science perspective. Students will master core concepts of computer science, mathematical foundations, and algorithmic concepts for robotics. Mechanics and electronics are covered in classes with an emphasis on their use in robotics applications and systems development. Students will acquire a broad knowledge of common robotics components, including software tools, mechanisms, and electronics, and learn to work effectively in interdisciplinary teams through hands-on projects where they design, prototype, fabricate, and test robotic systems.
The Additional Major in Robotics offers a dynamic fusion of multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary exploration. Open to students across all majors and colleges at Carnegie Mellon University, this program provides a gateway to mastering the essence of robotics. The Additional Major in robotics is designed for students who want to explore the field more than is possible through the Minor in Robotics. Generally, students should apply in their freshman year at CMU—but we allow admissions for students in their sophomore year provided they meet the requirements and their schedule allows enough time for degree completion.
The Accelerated Graduate Program – MS in Robotics is available to currently enrolled Carnegie Mellon undergraduates. It allows students to receive an admission decision to the MS in Robotics (MSR) program early and without paying to submit a full application. Students interested in the program should apply at the beginning of their senior year. Admission decisions are announced the following January. The goal is to confirm acceptance prior to the normal job search and graduate school acceptance times. Early admission may also allow students to tailor the remainder of their undergraduate program to prepare for the masters program.
The Robotics Minor and Concentration is designed for Carnegie Mellon's undergraduates to delve into the core principles and practical applications of robotics. This immersive journey blends theoretical exploration with hands-on learning, commencing with a foundational introductory course. In-depth studies continue with essential courses in control systems and robotic manipulation, offering a comprehensive understanding. The Minor is accessible to current Carnegie Mellon undergraduates from any major outside the School of Computer Science, while the Concentration is exclusively available to School of Computer Science undergraduates. Aspiring participants are encouraged to apply once their primary major is declared.