Application Plans and Deadlines
At Carnegie Mellon, we have several application plans to choose from. Review each plan below to decide which is the best option for you.
Application Plans and Deadlines
Early Decision
Early Decision is a binding application plan for students who view Carnegie Mellon as their first choice university. This means if you're admitted through Early Decision, you're committed to attending Carnegie Mellon and must withdraw any applications you may have submitted to other institutions.
Early Decision Deadline: November 3 Notified by: December 15 Enroll by: February 1
Early Decision is not available for the School of Drama, BXA Design programs or the School of Music.
Early Decision Instructions and Information
If you’re admitted to Carnegie Mellon, you’re expected to enroll.
You should not apply for Early Decision if you have a pending Early Decision application with another college or university.
You must agree to withdraw applications previously submitted to other institutions, in any country, when notified of Early Decision acceptance at Carnegie Mellon. To do this, please complete and submit the Early Decision Agreement (PDF) (opens in new window) along with the rest of your application.
You can apply to only one college within the university.
Three decisions can be given: admit, deny or defer to Regular Decision.
You're not able to reapply under Regular Decision if you're denied under Early Decision.
Please note that this application plan eliminates your ability to compare formal financial aid offers between Carnegie Mellon and other universities you may have applied to. You can get an estimate of your Carnegie Mellon financial aid offer by utilizing our Net Price Calculator .
Note about November standardized tests for Early Decision applicants: If you'd like us to consider test scores, it's strongly preferred that Early Decision applicants complete all standardized testing by November 1. If there are circumstances that have led you to take a test after November 1, but still in the month of November, make sure you've indicated the future test you're taking on the Common Application. The Office of Admission will do our best to wait until these scores arrive before making an admission decision; however, this will cause a delay in the review of your application. December testing is too late for Early Decision consideration.
Regular Decision
Regular Decision is the most common plan for students who apply to Carnegie Mellon. It’s common for students to apply Regular Decision to a number of institutions and then compare financial aid offers.
Regular Decision Deadline: January 5 Notified by: No later than April 1 Enroll by: May 1
Regular Decision for Schools of Drama and Music Deadline: December 1 Notified by: No later than April 1 Enroll by: May 1
If you're applying to the Schools of Architecture, Art, Design, Drama or Music, please review information for College of Fine Arts applicants . We encourage College of Fine Arts applicants to submit their application earlier in the process in order to secure auditions or portfolio review appointments.
Please keep in mind:
Regular Decision applicants who want to change to the Early Decision application plan may do so by emailing the Office of Admission by November 1. An admission decision will be available in December for applicants who move to Early Decision.
Regular Decision applicants switching to Early Decision will be required to submit an Early Decision Agreement (PDF) (opens in new window) .
Transfer Admission
Each year, Carnegie Mellon admits a small number of transfer students as space permits. The policy for transferring varies from college to college within Carnegie Mellon, so please carefully review the deadlines below as well as the transfer application instructions .
Fall Transfer (All colleges/schools except College of Fine Arts) Deadline: February 16* Notified by: May 17 Enroll by: June 1
*All supporting documents must be received by March 1 for fall transfer.
Fall Transfer (College of Fine Arts) Deadline: December 1 for drama and music, January 3 for architecture, art and design* Notified by: April 1 Enroll by: May 1
* All supporting documents must be received by February 16 for fall CFA transfer