Pontiac (born c. 1720, on the Maumee River [now in Ohio , U.S.]—died April 20, 1769, near the Mississippi River [at present-day Cahokia , Ill.]) was an Ottawa Indian chief who became a great intertribal leader when he organized a combined resistance—known as Pontiac’s War (1763–64)—to British power in the Great Lakes area.
Little is known of Pontiac’s early life, but by 1755 he had become a tribal chief. His commanding manner and talent for strategic planning enabled him to also become the leader of a loose confederacy among the Ottawa, the Potawatomi, and the Ojibwa. In 1760 he met Maj. Robert Rogers , a British colonial ranger on his way to occupy Michilimackinac (St. Ignace, Mich.) and other forts surrendered by the French during the French and Indian War of 1754–63. Pontiac agreed to let the British troops pass unmolested on condition that he be treated with respect.
He soon came to realize, however, that under the British rule his people would no longer be welcome in the forts and that they would ultimately be deprived of their hunting grounds by aggressive settlers encroaching upon their ancestral lands. Thus, in 1762 Pontiac enlisted support from practically every Indian tribe from Lake Superior to the lower Mississippi for a joint campaign to expel the British. In what the English called “Pontiac’s Conspiracy,” he arranged for each tribe to attack the nearest fort (May 1763) and then to combine to wipe out the undefended settlements.
The shrewd and daring leader elected to capture Detroit himself, and it is for this military action that he is particularly remembered. When his carefully laid plans for a surprise attack (May 7) were betrayed to the commanding officer, he was forced to lay siege to the fort. On July 31 Pontiac won a brilliant victory at the Battle of Bloody Run, but the besieged fort was nevertheless able to receive reinforcements, and on October 30 Pontiac withdrew to the Maumee River.
Pontiac’s larger plan was more successful. Of the 12 fortified posts attacked by the united tribes, all but 4 were captured; most of the garrisons were wiped out, several relief expeditions were nearly annihilated , and the frontier settlements were plundered and laid desolate. By 1764 continuing British action began to take its toll, however, and Pontiac finally agreed to conclude a treaty of peace in July 1766.
Three years later, while he was visiting in Illinois , a Peoria Indian stabbed and killed him. His death occasioned a bitter war among the tribes, and the Illinois group was almost annihilated by his avengers.