Billy Collins (born March 22, 1941, New York, New York, U.S.) is an American poet whose uncommonly accessible verse—characterized by plain language, gentle humour, and an alert appreciation for the mundane—made him one of the most popular poets in the United States .
Collins grew up mainly in Queens , New York . He wrote his first poem at age 12 and later joined his high-school literary magazine . In 1963 Collins received a B.A. from the College of the Holy Cross , Worcester, Massachusetts , and he went on to earn a doctorate in Romantic poetry from the University of California , Riverside, in 1971. That year he also began a lengthy career as a professor of English at Lehman College, Bronx, New York. During the 1970s he wrote a number of short counterculture-inspired poems for Rolling Stone magazine and, through a small press, published his first book of poetry, Pokerface (1977).
Though in the 1980s Collins produced another two collections, his work by and large remained unrecognized until 1990, when his manuscript for Questions About Angels (1991) was selected for the National Poetry Series, a program that sponsors the publication of deserving books of poetry. The Art of Drowning (1995), which won critical notice for its wry imagery and lucid intelligence, contributed to his growing reputation. Upon the publication of Picnic, Lightning (1998), Collins read his work on two National Public Radio programs, including Garrison Keillor ’s A Prairie Home Companion , and his charming appearances helped propel the volume’s sales into the remarkable tens of thousands.
Britannica Quiz
A Study of Poetry
In 1999 Collins found himself in the middle of a high-profile dispute between Random House, through which he had planned to publish a collection that included some older poems, and the University of Pittsburgh Press, which had issued his previous two volumes and maintained that the new book would cut into their still-robust sales. Although Sailing Alone Around the Room: New and Selected Poems was consequently not published until two years later, it was met with considerable acclaim. Later collections—such as Nine Horses (2002), The Trouble with Poetry, and Other Poems (2005), Ballistics (2008), Horoscopes for the Dead (2011), Aimless Love (2013), The Rain in Portugal (2016), and Whale Day (2020)—continued to explore familiar situations, such as listening to jazz or traveling on an airplane, with Collins’s distinct blend of spirited wit and nuanced observation. Though some commentators charged that his focus on the quotidian resulted in poems that were blandly pedestrian, his work was generally held in high esteem by critics and readers alike.
“Forgetfulness,” poem by Billy Collins American poet laureate Billy Collins discussing and reading his work, from the documentary Billy Collins: On the Road with the Poet Laureate (2003). (more)
In 2001 Collins was named poet laureate consultant in poetry to the Library of Congress , a post he held for two years. In that capacity he devised and promoted an initiative called Poetry 180, intended to help high-school students connect with and find pleasure in poetry. He also edited the accompanying anthologies Poetry 180: A Turning Back to Poetry (2003) and 180 More: Extraordinary Poems for Every Day (2005).