733 Copeland Street Located in the Shadyside area , Girasole Restaurant serves various Italian dishes in a cozy atmosphere. Transport yourself to an old seaside villa with cobblestone walls, savoring the authentic taste of Italian cuisine with each bite. Plan to visit this dining spot often as the menu rotates to feature fresh seasonal flavors.
5701 Bryant Street Featuring a friendly atmosphere and an attentive staff, it's easy to find memorable dinner outings at Joseph Tambellini Restaurant. Local favorite items include fried zucchini, cheese ravioli, and tiramisu. This dining place is perfect for a special celebration, whether for a graduation or an anniversary.
1 Boggs Avenue Looking for a BYOB place to eat? La Tavola Italiana Restaurant lets visitors enjoy their favorite drinks with hearty meals. For visitors who are feeling under the weather, the wedding soup is a comforting dish that will just hit the spot. As for a filling entree, the gamberi amore unveils a harmonious balance of flavors with shrimp, banana peppers, mushrooms, and linguini.
500 E North Avenue Embrace old-school Italian cuisine with heaping amounts of food. Situated in the North Side area, Legends Eatery serves nostalgic meals that will remind you of your grandmother's cooking. Indulge in ravishing menu items such as the mussels diablo, which is sauteed with garlic and gravy, and the Marsala wine-coated chicken scallopini.
5336 Butler Street This culinary establishment specializes in developing innovative twists on Italian classics. Marvel at breathtaking arrangements of ingredients with a meal like the swordfish, which is served with a white bean and garlic puree. With meals such as the crispy pork belly and lemon ricotta ravioli, it's clear that each menu item is carefully prepared for a spectacular dinner.
317 S Craig Street Explore an art-filled lunch or dinner at this Oakland-based restaurant with stained glass windows and captivating paintings. Taste the freshness of al dente pasta rolled by hand, devouring a dish like lobster ravioli or shrimp scampi. Savor each bite of masterfully made meals, experiencing the chef’s intricate attention to detail in your appetizer, entree, and dessert.
5523 Walnut Street This casual eatery boasts an array of sweet and savory bites and is a popular Shadyside place for gelato and pizza. Seeking a warm sandwich with plenty of cheese for lunch? Try Mercurio's paninis with a dish like the melazana, enjoying roasted tomato sauce and ricotta cheese. Don't miss having a scoop of the caramel coffee crunch or apple pie gelato for dessert.