Art on Tap: Leprechaun Lounge | The Westmoreland Museum of Art
March 14, 2025 at 6 p.m.
Luck out during this delightfully Irish evening at The Westmoreland Museum of Art. Sip on green beer while enjoying live music, entertainment, and interactive games. Each Art on Tap event features light bites and includes one drink from the cash bar.
Parade Day Mass at St. Patrick's Church in the Strip District
March 15, 2025 at 8 a.m.
Parade-goers and marchers can start their day off in the true spirit of St. Patrick with Roman Catholic Mass.
Parade Day Dash
March 15, 2025
NEW this year! Get your energy up before the parade at the Parade Day Dash, a 5K and 1-Mile Family Fun Run/Walk winding through downtown Pittsburgh. Runners and walkers alike will receive a limited-edition hoodie, finisher medal, and bib as part of their registration.
Kegs and Eggs | City Works
March 15, 2025 from 8-11 a.m.
Start your celebrations at the ultimate pre-parade party in in Market Square for City Work's Kegs & Eggs party for a breakfast buffet and drink specials on green beer, Guinness, Bloody Marys and mimosas.
Burgh Bus/Molly's Trolleys Brewery Hops | Inner Groove
March 15, 2025
Inner Groove has assembled an all-star lineup worthy of a superhero movie. Take your pick of brewery hops on March 15: the Verona neighborhood includes stops at Inner Groove, Acclamation Brewing, and Local Remedy Brewing.
St. Patty's Day with the Jig-Offs | Abjuration Brewing
March 15, 2025 A special beer release and a live band playing Irish jigs and folks music with Safari Eats supplying the food. Can you say perfect St. Patty's day evening ?
Howl at the Moon
March 14-15, 2025
Get shamrock'd at Howl at the Moon in Downtown Pittsburgh with two great nights full of green beer, live music and specials on green beer, Lucky Charms shots, Jameson Orange Spritz, and Blarney Bombs.
Irish City St. Patrick’s Day Celebration | Pittsburgh Brewing Company
March 15, 2025
Spend the day celebrating at Pittsburgh Brewing Company with a full lineup of festive fun. Kick things off with a classic Kegs and Eggs breakfast from 8-10 a.m., then enjoy live performances from local bands, food trucks, and a visit from a mischievous leprechaun. Between rounds of green beer, check out the cigar bar and fire pits, play yard games, snap photos in themed booths, test your swing on the golf simulator, or get some ink from on-site tattoo artists.
St. Patrick's Day Bar Crawl | South Side
March 15, 2025
Join the ultimate pub crawl with green beers and great vibes with multiple stops along the South Side. Your wristband gets you into each venue quickly with 50% off drink specials plus live music and DJs at select locations plus a photographer to capture all your best moments.