Neighborhood Planning
Neighborhood planners act as liaisons between City government and the community for most planning processes. Neighborhood planners participate in, and often coordinate, community plans. This group of planners acts as go-to people for explanations of zoning, development, transportation and other planning-related matters.
Whether you're an individual or a representative of a community organization, neighborhood planners are here to help.
Planning Education Series
This is a series of informational sessions coordinated by DCP to build up knowledge for the upcoming neighborhood plan process. Each session focuses on a different topic area. Most often, the series will be held in the neighborhood where there is a neighborhood planning process about to begin.
Registered Community Organizations (RCOs)
The registered community organization program establishes a set of standards for community-based organizations. If the organization meets these standards, it can initiate a process where it follows the standards in this guide to create a neighborhood plan that may be adopted by the Planning Commission.
Public Engagement Guide
The public engagement guide outlines a framework for how the City should conduct engagement efforts throughout the next phases of the comprehensive planning process and establishes guidelines for improving the approach to engagement more broadly. The guide was developed through a collaboration of residents, community organizations, and City Planning. It is designed to help increase engagement with the planning process.
Neighborhood Plan Guide
In collaboration with public agencies and community planning partners, City Planning has developed the Neighborhood Plan Guide to establish a framework for how to create high-quality and consistent neighborhood plans. This guide creates a standard for the development of neighborhood plans that can be adopted by the Planning Commission. The City of Pittsburgh will initiate these planning processes in most instances and will use this document to guide its work. Registered Community Organizations can also initiate the neighborhood planning process and work with public agencies to follow these standards and adopt a plan.
Current Master & Neighborhood Plans
last updated: 08/20/2025