At Carnegie Mellon University, we do the work that matters to solve real-world problems. And at the Center for Business Engagement (CBE), we facilitate the connections that make that work possible.
The CBE team works with both external industry and government partners and CMU faculty seeking to collaborate with those partners. We start and guide the conversations — with the right people — that lead to sponsored research partnerships, tech transfer, capstone projects, talent recruitment and much more.
We look forward to meeting you, understanding your goals and challenges, and exploring the possibilities for partnership here at CMU.
Meet the team below.
Amy Klinke
Assistant Vice President, Business Engagement
Email Amy Connect on LinkedIn
Prior to leading the Center for Business Engagement team at Carnegie Mellon University, Amy was a senior director at the Business Engagement Center at the University of Michigan. At the University of Michigan, she was instrumental in developing strategic partnerships with industry leaders and built a successful track record of securing research funds and generating significant philanthropic support for university priorities. Additionally, she played a founding role in the establishment of Michigan’s Center for Entrepreneurship.
Earlier in her career, Amy served as the director of community development for the City of Ann Arbor, Michigan, and Washtenaw County and as a policy analyst for the county. In these roles, she worked directly for the Washtenaw County administrator, board of commissioners and mayor of Ann Arbor. Sher has also held roles with the Washtenaw Community Health Organization and Washtenaw Housing Alliance. Before moving to Ann Arbor in 2000, Amy conducted post-graduate research in economic development and microenterprise in Zimbabwe, Africa.
Amy holds a bachelor’s degree in political economy from Hillsdale College and a master’s degree in social work with a concentration in social and economic development from Washington University.
Terri Deasy
Director, Business Engagement
Email Terri Connect on LinkedIn Or call 412-268-4013
Terri joined the Center for Business Engagement in 2021 after managing corporate partnerships at CyLab, CMU’s security and privacy institute for three years. She is responsible for developing and growing relationships with corporate organizations seeking to engage in research and educational programs.
Prior to joining CMU in 2018, Terri spent nearly 15 years in the private sector where she served in various consulting roles and worked with enterprises focused on building custom technology solutions. Terri is the co-founder of Pgh Women Connecting Women, a networking group that brings together diverse professional women in the Pittsburgh region. She holds a bachelor’s degree in communications from Point Park University.
Kari Carbone
Senior Development Associate, Business Engagement
Email Kari Or call 412-268-2824
Kari is responsible for supporting the administrative functions of the Associate Vice President of Business Engagement and Strategy as well as assisting the Business Engagement and Foundation Relations teams.
Prior to joining CMU, Kari spent the majority of her career in the radio industry. She has a bachelor’s degree in journalism and communication and a master’s degree of business administration.
Jen Duessel
Associate Director, Business Engagement, Campus Liaison
Email Jen Connect on LinkedIn Or call 412-268-7930
Jen is responsible for fostering relationships with corporate organizations and connecting corporate partners to CMU faculty, staff and students. She joined the Center for Business Engagement in 2022 after working with CMU’s Institute for Software Research and supporting the Masters of Software Engineering Professional Programs.
Jen has an extensive background in alumni relations and experience in business development. She holds a bachelor’s degree in communication from the University of Pittsburgh and a master’s degree in communication technology from Point Park University.
Ryan Kuehn
Assistant Director, Business Engagement
Email Ryan Connect on LinkedIn Or call 412-268-6856
Ryan supports the Director of Operations and the entire Center for Business Engagement team with a variety of tasks. He’s also the first person visitors meet when entering the center’s on-campus office. Prior to his current role, Ryan has spent his career as part of operations and customer service teams at UPMC Enterprises and UPMC Health Plan.
Ryan holds bachelor’s degrees in history and philosophy from Penn State University.
Dave Minicucci
Senior Associate Director, Advancement Research
Email David Or call 412-268-9101
Dave is responsible for the data and information needs of the business engagement team as well as colleagues across campus. He works to ensure that the business engagement staff have access to the most timely and relevant information to inform their decision-making when engaging with our corporate and foundation partners.
Dave holds a bachelor’s degree in political science from Duquesne University.
Andrew Schilffarth
Assistant Director, Business Engagement
Email Andrew Connect on LinkedIn Or call 412-268-4527
Andrew provides logistical, stewardship and data support for the business engagement team.
Before working at Carnegie Mellon University, Andrew was a registered lobbyist in Pennsylvania that focused on pursuing local and state government grants for community and economic development. Andrew holds bachelor’s degrees in political science and communication from the University of Pittsburgh.