Pittsburgh Opera is proud to announce its stellar class of 2025-26 Resident Artists :
Pittsburgh Opera’s Resident Artist Program is one of the country's leading training programs for young singers. Over 800 applicants from around the world regularly vie for just a handful of openings.
After completing advanced education such as graduate degrees, Pittsburgh Opera’s Resident Artists further their careers under the guidance of the opera world's leaders and innovators. They study languages, diction, movement, and acting, while developing their vocal skills, expanding their repertoire, and performing on stage in Pittsburgh Opera productions.
In addition to singers, Pittsburgh Opera’s Resident Artist program includes a Stage Director position and a pianist position.
Pittsburgh Opera’s Resident Artists regularly go on to headline at the world's most prestigious opera houses, including the Metropolitan Opera. Emily Richter , a Pittsburgh Opera Resident Artist from 2022-2024, was one of just five Grand Finals Winners of the 2024 Metropolitan Opera Eric and Dominique Laffont Competition. Other notable alumni include:
Pittsburgh Opera’s Resident Artist Program is made possible, in part, by the generosity of individual sponsors. The 2025-26 Resident Artists, and the Pittsburgh Opera Music Staff, are sponsored by:
Premier Sponsors*
Robert J. & Sharon E. Sclabassi (Matthew Soibelman)
Sponsors
Steven Siebert (Maeve Berry)
Susan Campbell & Patrick Curry and The Bernadette G. Callery Endowed Fund for Resident Artists (Shannon Crowley)
The Haley Family Fund, Susan Candace Hunt, and Steve & Gail Mosites (Lauryn Davis)
John Battaglia and Rob & Janet Squires (Dana Kinney)
Anna Futrell ( Head of Music Glenn Lewis )
Hilda Fu, John A. Gillespie, MD, and Mike & Kumiko Lancet (Erik Nordstrom)
Eileen & John Olmsted ( Director of Musical Studies and Chorus Master Mark Trawka )
John & Nancy Traina, Janice Talerico, and Abby L. Morrison in memory of Dr. Lesa B. Morrison (Logan Wagner)
John & Virginia DiPucci, Alice Victoria Gelormino, and Dr. Eugene N. Myers (Audrey Welsh)
Pittsburgh Opera is profoundly grateful for these sponsors, who are helping to develop the next generation of opera stars. For information on how you can become a Resident Artist sponsor, please contact Rachel Kisic, Director of Development, at 412-281-0912 x226 or via email .
*Premier Sponsors underwrite the full stipend of an artist’s residency