December 12, 2024 Download as a PDF
Pittsburgh Opera presents Haydn’s Armida Jan. 25–Feb.2, 2025
Pittsburgh Opera presents its first-ever performances of Joseph Haydn’s opera Armida , January 25 through February 2, 2025, at the Pittsburgh CAPA School Theater , in downtown Pittsburgh.
Overview:
All’s fair in love and war
To prevent the capture of Jerusalem by the knights of the First Crusade, The Prince of Darkness has sent the enchantress Armida into the world to seduce the Christian heroes and turn them from their duty.
The bravest of these, Rinaldo, has fallen under Armida's spell. But, to her surprise, she becomes enchanted by him as well. She comes to love him so deeply that she cannot bring herself to destroy him. For both, duty clashes with desire. As war rages around them, will love conquer them both?
Containing some of Haydn’s most inspired music, not only is Armida Haydn’s most highly regarded opera, but the composer himself referred to it as his best work.
Performance Schedule:
Saturday, Jan. 25, 2025 * 8:00 PM
Tuesday, Jan. 28, 2025 * 7:00 PM
Friday, Jan. 31, 2025 * 7:30 PM
Sunday, Feb. 2, 2025 * 2:00 PM
Fun Facts:
Multiple composers and librettists have created Armidas over the centuries. All tell variations of Torquato Tasso 's poem Gerusalemme liberata ( Jerusalem Delivered ). Joseph Haydn ’s Armida premiered in 1784. Its libretto was taken from Antonio Tozzi 's 1775 opera Rinaldo , as amended by Nunziato Porta . A version with music by Italian composer Gioachino Rossini premiered in 1817. Yet another version, composed by Antonín Dvořák, premiered in 1904.
Pittsburgh Opera is mounting a new production of Armida .
Armida is sung in Italian, with English supertitles projected above the stage.
Tickets:
Tickets are available:
Online at culturaldistrict.org
By phone at 412-456-6666
In person at the Theater Square Box Office, 665 Penn Avenue, Monday - Saturday from 10:00 AM - 6:00 PM, or at the venue one hour before each performance
In addition:
Tickets are half-off for children and teens ages 6–18 for all performances
College and university students, faculty, and staff are eligible for Pittsburgh Opera’s Cheap Seats program
Groups of six or more people get great discounts and special services
Additional discounts , including for students, seniors, members of military, and more, are available.
Pittsburgh Opera’s Opus Pass lets patrons see as many live opera performances as they want all season. For one low monthly price, passholders get a year’s worth of unlimited admission to every performance of every opera, subject to availability.
Free, Related Events:
Pre-Opera Talks
Ticketholders are invited to attend a Pre-Opera Talk one hour before each performance, in the CAPA Black Box. Learn about the composer, the story, and some juicy details about the opera! These talks are free to all ticketholders.
Meet the Artists
Ticketholders for the Tuesday, January 28th performance are invited to join General Director Christopher Hahn immediately following the performance to enjoy lively repartee, as Mr. Hahn interviews the stars of the production. This event is free, and is held in the CAPA Black Box.
WQED-FM Preview Show
Hosted by WQED’s Anna Singer, this half-hour preview on WQED-FM 89.3 and wqed.org/fm gives listeners an in-depth introduction to A rmida ’s singers, music, and production. The show is broadcast twice: Saturday, January 18th at 12:30PM, and Friday, January 24th at 7:00PM.
Sponsorships:
Pittsburgh Opera’s performances of Armida are sponsored in part by The Gailliot Fund.
Pittsburgh Opera’s season is made possible, onstage and off, by support from all corners of the community. Pittsburgh Opera offers a range of flexible gift options and potential tax benefits for individuals, local businesses, and corporations. Sponsorship opportunities include:
Production Sponsorships – Help bring a production to life while pulling back the curtain and entertaining clients or friends. Gifts begin at $25,000.
Resident Artist Sponsorships – Support future opera stars while building personal relationships with artists. Gifts begin at $10,000.
Family Day & Community Programs – Underwrite free or low-cost concerts, because everyone deserves access to opera. Gifts begin at $5,000.
Parties & Events – Sponsor Galas, networking events, parties, and happy hours. Gifts begin at $1,000.
To learn more about becoming a sponsor, contact Pittsburgh Opera at 412-281-0912 x226.