Speaker Bios
Malak Alseaf
Senior Data Analyst, Carnegie Mellon University in Qatar
Learn More About Malak
Malak Alseaf is a Senior Data Analyst based at Carnegie Mellon University in Qatar, working in close collaboration with the Institutional Research and Analysis (IR&A) team in Pittsburgh. She leads the institutional research function for the Qatar campus and, over the past two years, has developed a data strategy aligned with the main campus to enhance data governance and analytics capabilities. Malak has played a key role in integrating academic and operational datasets to enable data-driven decision-making across the Qatar campus. She holds a Bachelor of Science in Information Systems from Carnegie Mellon University and is currently pursuing a Master of Science in Business Analytics from the Tepper School of Business.
Melissa Baker
Assistant Vice Provost, Institutional Research and Analysis, Carnegie Mellon University
Learn More About Melissa
Melissa Baker has been a vital part of Carnegie Mellon University for over 25 years, starting in the Division of Budget and Planning, transitioning to the newly established Institutional Research (IR) department in 2005, and helping build the IR function over the years. As the Assistant Vice Provost for Institutional Research and Analysis, she oversees all facets of the university’s IR functions, including assessment, comprehensive internal and external analyses, and internal and external reporting on students, faculty, staff, finance, research, space, and alumni. With her years of experience at CMU, Melissa is adept at developing innovative solutions to both longstanding and emerging questions, leveraging her deep understanding of the university’s data, processes, and systems. As a member of the Institutional Effectiveness and Planning team, she is fortunate to be part of a cohesive team that is dedicated to enhancing the university’s thoughtful use of both quantitative and qualitative data to inform strategic decision making and support stakeholders across all facts of university planning.
Kate Barraclough
Vice Provost for Education, Carnegie Mellon University
Learn More About Kate
Kate Barraclough was named as Carnegie Mellon University’s vice provost for education (VPE) in August 2024. In this role, she oversees the university’s educational programs, including the development and implementation of university-wide academic policies and procedures, new academic offerings, and curricular innovation and coordination across CMU’s schools and colleges. Barraclough partners with academic and administrative units to advance integrative learning and high-impact educational practices through the work of the Office of Undergraduate Research and Scholar Development and the Leonard Gelfand Center for Service Learning and Outreach, as well as the University Lecture Series and other distinctive university experiences. Under her leadership, the VPE Office develops innovative, evidence-based approaches to enhance student learning, scholarship and engagement, and tailoring programs and services to meet the diverse needs of the CMU community.
Barraclough joined CMU’s Tepper School of Business in 2015 as the head of the school’s MBA program overseeing admissions, financial aid, student services, leadership development, and career planning and employment. From 2021 to 2024, she served as associate dean of master’s programs and teaching professor of finance, working closely with Tepper’s leadership and faculty to set the strategic direction for the school’s master’s programs and overseeing program curricula, academic policies and student success. Barraclough holds a faculty appointment at the Tepper School as a teaching professor of finance.
Before joining CMU, Barraclough served as director of Vanderbilt University’s master’s in finance program, where she oversaw strategic leadership of the program as well as its daily operations, including admissions, curriculum, career management and alumni relations. Her career also includes work in KPMG’s Financial Advisory Services practice in Canberra, Australia, where she led budget analysis and financial models for government programs and clients.
Barraclough earned her bachelor’s degrees in economics and commerce and a Ph.D. in finance from the Australian National University.
Angela Blanton
Vice President for Finance and Chief Financial Officer, Carnegie Mellon University
Learn More About Angela
Angela Blanton was appointed Carnegie Mellon University’s vice president for Finance and chief financial officer in 2017 after serving as interim vice president and CFO in 2016.
As CFO, Blanton provides strategic leadership for the university’s business and finance functions, as well as for the management of its financial and capital resources. She oversees Budget and Financial Planning, Business Applications Development and Support, the Controller’s Office, Procurement Services, the Treasurer’s Office, Finance Training and Communications, and University Audit Services. Within those units lie critical business functions including (but not limited to) financial reporting, sponsored projects accounting, international operations, accounts receivable and payable, payroll, and financial systems. Blanton is highly collaborative across all functions to support the university’s vision of transformative impact on society through continual innovation in education, research, creativity, and entrepreneurship.
Blanton has over two decades of experience in finance, project management, and engineering disciplines within the higher education, financial services, and manufacturing industries; prior to joining Carnegie Mellon, she was CFO for PNC Investments.
Blanton serves on the global asset management firm GCM Governor’s board, which became a public company in 2020. She volunteers on the boards of several nonprofit organizations, including Code for America and Pittsburgh Public Theater (past chair). Additionally, Blanton serves on the Thought Leadership Committee for the Allegheny Conference on Community Development and is a member of the CNBC CFO Council.
Blanton received a Bachelor of Science in electrical engineering from the University of Michigan and her MBA from the Tepper School of Business at Carnegie Mellon University.
Derrick Bowen
Data Analyst, Business Support Services Division of FIRM, Carnegie Mellon University
Learn More About Derrick
Derrick Bowen is a data analyst supporting the Business Support Services team within the division of FIRM. He joined Carnegie Mellon University in February of 2024 and has since served a key role in developing tools and strategies for the growing analytical needs of facilities management & campus services. Derrick has developed dashboards to support FMCS operations in finance, facility resources, space management, and asset management at the university.
Before coming to CMU, Derrick’s past roles include serving as a business analyst in the retail industry, as well as a sales analyst in the recreational industry. He has a variety of analytics expertise from solving diverse problems in these industries and is constantly investigating data for new insights or ways to visualize them.
Brent Carothers
Associate Vice President for Budget and Financial Planning, Carnegie Mellon University
Learn More About Brent
Brent Carothers is the associate vice president for Budget and Financial Planning. In this role, Brent is responsible for overseeing the development and management of the university’s $1.3 billion operating budget. In addition to leading the Finance Division’s Budget and Financial Planning team, Brent partners with leaders across the university to develop financial analysis and execute business models for critical initiatives. Through data-driven approaches, he helps guide the university so that we can understand how decisions today can provide the greatest impact, while ensuring the long-term financial health of the institution.
Prior to joining the university, Brent served as the director, North America Commercial Finance, at Viatris (formerly Mylan), heading the commercial finance and accounting team for a $1 billion segment of the company. At Viatris, Brent was a proven change leader propelling growth initiatives, fostering partnerships, boosting forecast accuracy and driving efficiencies across eight manufacturing sites under an evolving product portfolio. Prior to his time at Viatris, Brent served in financial leadership positions at Education Management Corporation, where he oversaw the deployment of a $150 million CapEx portfolio and a large real estate footprint. In addition to his financial administration roles, Brent has experience behind the podium, teaching as an adjunct professor at Waynesburg University and previously at Argosy University.
Mark Chimel
Assistant Director for Institutional Research and Analysis, Carnegie Mellon University
Learn More About Mark
Mark joined Carnegie Mellon’s institutional research team in November 2021 and is now an assistant director in the office. Since joining CMU, he has worked on a variety of different assessment and analysis projects, including working with the Mastercard Foundation Scholars Program at CMU-Africa, the Rales Fellows and Tartan Scholars programs, the Academic and Professional Engagement Survey, and efforts to centralize graduate data across the institution. He was the project manager for the Graduate Applications and Admissions Data (GRAAD) project, which has brought together graduate admissions data from sixteen different systems in a centralized data set.
Before joining CMU, Mark worked in higher education in several roles, from baseball coach to academic advisor to leading an online and continuing education unit. The knowledge gained from serving in these varied roles across institutions has been beneficial in understanding the diverse areas with which he now partners in institutional research. Mark’s interests in expanding access to high-quality education and breaking down silos to deliver solutions have also been integral to the projects he has worked on at CMU.
Chelsea Blackburn Cohen, Ph.D.
Senior Manager of Strategic Initiatives and Engagement, Carnegie Mellon University
Learn More About Chelsea
Chelsea Blackburn Cohen is a higher education strategist and policy professional committed to advancing the public mission of higher education. With over a decade of experience at the intersection of academia, public policy, and social impact, she brings deep expertise in institutional strategy, stakeholder engagement, and mission-driven leadership.
Chelsea currently serves as Senior Manager of Strategic Initiatives and Engagement in the Office of the President at Carnegie Mellon University, where she guides external relationships across regional public and private sectors, oversees university-wide community impact efforts, and advances strategic initiatives on behalf of university leadership.
Previously, she led the U.S. section of the international human rights and higher education organization Scholars at Risk, where she developed a network of over 200 universities to promote academic freedom and institutional autonomy. In that role, she also designed professional learning programs and directed a Mellon-funded Academic Freedom Fellowship.
Her scholarly work has explored the evolving role of higher education in society, knowledge production and dissemination, globalization, and workforce transitions. She has been an invited speaker and facilitator at domestic and international conferences and advisory groups focused on higher education policy, values, and advocacy.
Inspired by the Wisconsin Idea—that the benefits of the university should extend to all—Chelsea earned her Ph.D. in Higher Education Leadership and Policy Analysis from the University of Wisconsin–Madison.
Matt Coley
Senior Director of Business Operations for the College of Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University
Learn More About Matt
In his current role, Matthew spearheads data analytics efforts for the College of Engineering. He has developed an extensive suite of interactive dashboards that provide valuable insights across a wide range of areas, including sponsored research (proposals, awards, and expenditures), faculty annual reporting, space utilization, undergraduate courses, and benchmarking data on peer institutions in areas such as enrollment, faculty size, research output, and degrees conferred. These tools have become essential resources for decision-making and long-term planning within the college.
Prior to joining Carnegie Mellon, Matthew worked in a supply chain capacity at Sunoco Chemicals and spent eight years in Student Financial Services at Robert Morris University. He holds both a BSBA and an MBA from Robert Morris University.
Amy Coutu
Assistant Vice President, Enterprise Applications, Carnegie Mellon University
Learn More About Amy
Amy Coutu is the assistant vice president of Enterprise Applications. In her role, Coutu works with the ClO, the Senior Management Team (SMT), and many Business Partners across the campus, providing leadership throughout the strategic planning, development, and support phases of essential university enterprise applications and data solutions. Along with the expertise of our partners, she helps drive the university toward more efficient business and IT solutions. She also drives change to improve practices in enterprise application and data solution development, support, and architecture.
Before coming to CMU, her past roles included developer, business analyst, software architect, director, and VP of IT. She has worked in various industries, including IBM, CA Technologies, and OnLogic, and consulted for local Vermont government agencies. During her career, she has recognized the importance of building strong teams and focusing on user experience to drive positive business outcomes. Technology is only as successful as its adoption. Her personal philosophy is that IT should be an enabler of growth for a business, not a cost of doing business.
Augie Delbert
Manager of Data and Analytics, Office of Human Resources, Carnegie Mellon University
Learn More About Augie
Augie Delbert joined the Office of Human Resources in 2022 as Manager of Data and Analytics. He brings 13 years of experience working with data and analytics in higher education settings. Prior to coming to CMU, he served in institutional research, effectiveness, planning, and accreditation roles at other Pittsburgh institutions. He is passionate about making data accessible in meaningful ways that help others answer questions and improve.
In his role with OHR, he is charged with building a strategic roadmap for expansion of HR’s analytics capabilities through dashboard development. He also serves as an OHR representative and active contributor in the CMU Data & Analytics Collaborative Team. He holds an MA in Higher Education Administration from Boston College and an MS in Computational Mathematics & Statistics from Duquesne University.
Jack Haser
Data Analyst, Business Support Services Division of FIRM, Carnegie Mellon University
Learn More About Jack
Jack Haser is a data analyst who joined the Business Support Services team within the division of FIRM in March 2024. Jack serves a role developing data products and dashboards that support Facilities Management & Campus Services operations and analytics. Jack’s past role was in government contracting, supporting performance analytics at the National Risk Management Center.
Martial Hebert
Dean of the School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University
Learn More About Martial
A native of France, Martial Hebert earned a doctorate in computer science at the University of Paris. He joined the Robotics Institute in 1984 — just five years after it was founded — and was named a full professor in 1999. Upon joining the CMU faculty, Hebert became part of the Autonomous Land Vehicles program, a precursor of today's research on self-driving vehicles. He performed research on interpreting 3D data from range sensors for obstacle detection, environment modeling and object recognition. For the next three decades, he led major research programs in autonomous systems, including ground and air vehicles, with contributions in the areas of perception for environment understanding and human interaction.
Hebert's research primarily centers on computer vision. He has led research on fundamental components, such as scene understanding, object recognition and applying machine learning to computer vision, as well as applications, which include systems that enable older adults and people with disabilities to live more independently. To help meet the needs of a rapidly expanding computer vision industry, he created the nation's first master's degree program in computer vision.
Hebert is a member of both the IEEE Robotics and Automation, and the IEEE Computer societies. Throughout his career, he has published hundreds of refereed papers in journals and conference proceedings, and has contributed to multiple edited volumes. He currently serves as editor-in-chief of the International Journal of Computer Vision. In 2022 he was named a University Professor, CMU's highest distinction for faculty members.
Matthew Hoolsema
Director of Data Science and Advanced Analytics in the Office of Institutional Effectiveness and Planning, Carnegie Mellon University
Learn More About Matthew
Matt joined Carnegie Mellon University in 2015 and now serves as Director of Data Science and Advanced Analytics in the Office of Institutional Effectiveness and Planning. He oversees data modeling and dashboarding projects for university leadership and the campus community, and the development of new predictive analytic models to support early interventions with students. He has extensive experience leading data and analytical projects related to student persistence and graduation, academic advising, participation in high-impact educational practices, peer benchmarking, and university carrying capacity and constraints. Prior to working in higher education Hoolsema was a K-12 teacher, and continues to promote data-informed strategies and policies that promote student access and success in education.
Chris Kamerling
Director, Data & Analystics, Business Support Services Division of FIRM, Carnegie Mellon University
Learn More About Chris
Chris Kamerling joined Carnegie Mellon University in 2007 responsible for managing the operation and support of Oracle E-Business Suite across the university. Since July 2021, Chris has served as director, data & analytics in the Business Support Services team within the FIRM division overseeing the development of data products and dashboards to streamline financial reporting for select administrative divisions and to support facilities management & campus services analytics. Known for blending technical expertise with business acumen, Chris is passionate about leveraging data to answer real-world problems and support data-informed growth.
Prior to joining CMU, Chris was employed by Bombardier Transportation (now Alstom), a rail transport manufacturing company, where he served in multiple roles responsible for functionally and technically supporting financial systems, business processes and financial reporting.
Kirby Livingston
Data Strategy and Institutional Research Manager, Carnegie Mellon University
Learn More About Kirby
Kirby joined CMU’s Office of Institutional Research & Analysis in 2023 and is dedicated primarily to the Tepper School of Business. Kirby provides strategic data analysis and insights to support data-informed decision-making and enhance the student experience. His work includes managing data collection, analysis, and reporting, with a focus on institutional research strategy and business school rankings. He also leads assessment efforts within the Tepper School and contributes on university-wide initiatives such as CMU‘s Strategic Plan Update in 2024. Kirby has recently taken on a larger role in collaborative data projects at CMU, including serving as co-chair of the Data & Analytics Collaborative Events Committee, which hosted a series of “Virtual Learn” sessions and a 2-day hackathon event based on the 2024 CMU IronViz competition.
After completing his undergraduate studies at Ohio’s Oberlin College, Kirby taught English and coached 3 sports at Salisbury School in Connecticut. He went on to earn a doctorate in Educational Leadership & Policy Analysis from the University of Wisconsin–Madison, where he worked in several areas including career services, academic services, and intercollegiate athletics. Kirby enjoys live music, spending time outdoors with his wife and dogs, and both playing and officiating lacrosse.
Diana Lomelin
Data Scientist, Office of Institutional Effectiveness and Planning, Carnegie Mellon University
Learn More About Diana
Diana collaborates as a Data Scientist in the Data Science and Advanced Analytics Department in the Office of Institutional Effectiveness and Planning. She joined CMU in February of 2023, bringing her joint professional experience of over 10 years in Business Intelligence, Software Development and Data Science to Institutional Research to collaborate in analytics projects by establishing Machine Learning tools and processes to derive more value from the rich data resources of the institution and take advantage of the cloud technologies available to the team. As a Project Manager Professional, she began integrating the Agile Methodology to the development process to leverage the incremental and iterative nature of Agile on the team's increasingly complex projects. Prior to joining CMU, she worked for companies such as Unilever, Microsoft and as business analyst for financial institutions.
Theresa Mayer
Vice President for Research, Carnegie Mellon University
Learn More About Theresa
Theresa S. Mayer is Carnegie Mellon University’s Vice President for Research, providing leadership for the University’s research enterprise and advocating for the role that science, technology, and innovation play nationally and globally. Theresa holds joint faculty appointments in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and the Department of Materials Science and Engineering in the College of Engineering. Theresa was previously Purdue University’s executive vice president for research and partnerships and an electrical and computer engineering professor. There, she oversaw Purdue’s research enterprise. Mayer served as vice president for research and innovation and a professor of electrical and computer engineering at Virginia Tech. Prior to her role at Virginia Tech, Mayer was at Pennsylvania State University for more than 20 years, where she served as a distinguished professor of electrical engineering, associate dean for research and innovation in the College of Engineering, the site director of the National Science Foundation’s National Nanotechnology Infrastructure Network and director of the Materials Research Institute Nanofabrication Laboratory. She is internationally recognized for her research in applications of nanotechnology to electronic and photonic devices with new and previously unexplored functions. Her work in directed and self-assembly of nanoparticles has been used to expand the types and complexity of materials that can be integrated into devices beyond standard lithographic approaches, enabling a wide range of novel structures from low-power integrated nanosensor circuits to nanostructured gradient index optical components. She has more than 350 technical publications, invited presentations and tutorials, and holds eight patents. Several of her co-inventions have been transitioned into commercial products. She is a fellow of the Institute for Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and has received numerous awards for her teaching and research, including the NSF CAREER award. Throughout her career, she has supported the advancement of women in science and engineering. Mayer earned her bachelor’s degree from Virginia Tech, and a master’s degree and Ph.D. in electrical engineering from Purdue.
Alexis Parker
Data Analytics Development Manager, Computing Services, Carnegie Mellon University
Learn More About Alexis
Alexis Parker is the data analytics development lead in CMU's Computing Services Division. With a strong dedication to effectively leveraging data, Parker collaborates closely with campus partners to lead cross-functional teams in collecting, analyzing, and delivering actionable insights that drive informed decision-making. Her expertise and guidance contribute to the success of Carnegie Mellon's enterprise data services.
Prior to joining CMU, Parker held a position as a Product Architect and consultant at Jacobson Consulting Applications, where she developed and implemented Business Intelligence (BI) products and integrations for museums, zoos, and amusement parks worldwide. Parker attributes her success to the collective knowledge shared by clients throughout her career as a consultant, trainer, and technical writer. She is committed to enhancing business performance through collaborative knowledge building and effectively implementing data sharing strategies.
Angela Schmitz
Data Analyst on the Brand Strategy team for University Communications and Marketing, Carnegie Mellon University
Learn More About Angela
Her skills include optimizing marketing strategy, focusing on analysis, data visualization, and storytelling. Angela developed a foundational tool to measure the email redesign's effectiveness and consequently led the analysis and data visualization of the results. From identifying which ad resonates best with the audience to deciding which link location will get the most clicks, Angela is obsessed with finding simple solutions to complex problems and leveraging data to inform even the smallest decisions.
Kelli Shuman
Associate Vice President and Chief Human Resources Officer, Carnegie Mellon University
Learn More About Kelli
Kelli is currently the Associate Vice President and Chief Human Resources Officer at Carnegie Mellon University, where she leads the university’s HR strategy and operations.
Prior to joining CMU in August of 2024, Kelli served as the Associate Vice President and Chief Human Resources Officer at Elon University in North Carolina from 2019 to 2024. In this role, she led initiatives in employee relations, talent acquisition, compensation and benefits, training, and community access and inclusion.
Earlier in her career, Kelli held several leadership roles at the South Dakota School of Mines & Technology, culminating in her final position as Vice President for Human Resources.
Nationally, Kelli is active in the College and University Professional Association fo Human Resources (CUPA-HR), where she serves as the Treasurer on the Board of Directors. She also serves on the Board of Directors for the Society for Higher Education Human Resources Executives as the Treasurer.
Geri Smith
Director of Risk Operations, Carnegie Mellon University
Learn More About Geri
Geri is a strategic leader in enterprise risk management, data analytics, and process improvement. As Director of Risk Operations at CMU, she oversees critical systems supporting risk assessment, business continuity, and disaster recovery while driving analytics strategies that enhance ERM decision-making.
Under her leadership, the Risk Operations team collaborates across university departments on a variety of analytics and technology initiatives, fostering process innovation and agility in an evolving risk landscape.
Previously, Geri served as Director of Corporate Compliance – Data Analytics, Automation, and Program Team at First National Bank, optimizing the regulatory risk assessment process and developing compliance data analytics. Before that, she was Director of Strategic Analytics at Factual Data (formerly CBCInnovis), leading process optimization and data-driven initiatives and analysis.
Geri is excited to return to her alma mater having earned her MBA from Carnegie Mellon University, specializing in quantitative analysis, IT, and corporate strategy.
Through her data-driven approach, Geri empowers organizations to navigate complex risks, streamline operations, and drive sustainable growth in risk management, analytics, and strategy.
Stan Waddell
Vice President for Information Technology and Chief Information Officer, Carnegie Mellon University
Learn More About Stan
Stan Waddell serves as CMU’s vice president for information technology and chief information officer. Waddell provides vision, leadership, and management to CMU’s computing enterprise, including developing and implementing a university-wide IT strategy.
Waddell also serves as a member of the university’s executive management team, providing support and counsel regarding the role of technology in advancing university-wide priorities and leading the development of a comprehensive technology and data management strategy that meets CMU's long-term goals.
Before joining CMU, Waddell was the associate vice president for information technology and CIO at the University of New Hampshire. He was the assistant vice chancellor and chief technology officer at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and spent nine years at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center. Waddell also served in the U.S. Navy as an aviation electronics technician for nine years.
Henry Zheng
Vice Provost for Institutional Effectiveness and Planning, Carnegie Mellon University
Learn More About Henry
Henry Zheng is CMU's inaugural vice provost for institutional effectiveness and planning. Zheng oversees institutional research and analysis, data science, and advanced analytics functions. He oversees internal and external reporting of the university’s assessment plan and plays a leading role in strategizing and leading the development of a data culture at CMU. Zheng provides strategic guidance for planning, evaluation, data analysis, and research methodologies that support key planning initiatives and stakeholders across the university.
Prior to joining CMU, Zheng served in various leadership positions, including as an associate vice president for strategic analytics at The Ohio State University (OSU), vice provost for institutional research and strategic analytics at Lehigh University, and assistant vice president at the Office of Academic Affairs at OSU. Zheng was co-editor of Big Data on Campus: Data Analytics and Decision Making in Higher Education, a Johns Hopkin University Press publication. Earlier in his professional career, Zheng was a research fellow with the National Center for Education Statistics in Washington D.C. Zheng currently serves as the guest editor for Wiley’s Publishing’s New Direction for Higher Education focusing on artificial intelligence and machine learning.