KEYNES LECTURE IN ECONOMICS
The British Industrial Revolution
in Global Perspective
ROBERT C. ALLEN
Fellow of the Academy
THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION was a turning point in the history of the world
and inaugurated two centuries of economic growth that have resulted in the
high incomes enjoyed in developed countries today.1 Technological progress
is the motor of economic growth, and the Industrial Revolution is defi ned
by famous technological breakthroughs: machinery to spin and weave cot-
ton, the use of coal to smelt and refi ne iron, and the steam engine.2 In the
words of the schoolboy made famous by T. S. Ashton: ‘About 1760 a wave
of gadgets swept over England’ (Ashton 1955: 42). The questions for today’s
lecture are: How can we explain the technological breakthroughs of the
Industrial Revolution? And, why did the Industrial Revolution happen in
Britain, rather than France, the Netherlands, or China?
These questions will be answered by developing these themes: in com-
parison with other countries, Britain had an unusual structure of wages
and prices in the eighteenth century, and this structure of wages and prices
was a major factor in explaining why the revolution happened in Britain.
In addition Britain had an effective ‘innovation system’ based on a high
Read at the Academy 29 October 2009.
1 The issues in this lecture are treated at greater length and with fuller referencing in Allen (2009a).
2 There has been a debate about the breadth of technological progress during the industrial
revolution with Crafts (1985), and Crafts and Harley (1992, 2000) arguing that productivity
growth was confi ned to the famous, revolutionised industries in the period 1801–31, while Temin
(1997) has argued that many more industries experienced productivity growth. Whatever one
believes about 1801–31, it is clear that many non-revolutionised industries experienced
productivity growth between 1500 and 1850. The incentives to invent discussed in this paper
applied to all industries, not just the famous ones I discuss here.
Proceedings of the British Academy, 167, 199–224. © The British Academy 2010.
200 Robert C. Allen
level of human capital, the appropriate engineering capability, and a few
scientifi c breakthroughs. These features of the British economy, which dis-
tinguish it from other countries in the world at that time, were consequences
of Britain’s superior trade performance and success in the European and
global economies in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
My interpretation is opposed to a common view that goes like this:
because the inventions of the Industrial Revolution had momentous con-
sequences, they must have been the result of momentous ideas. On the
contrary, I contend that the explanation of the inventions should not be
sought in great leaps of the imagination. Instead, the inventions can be
better understood in terms of the hard work of research and development
that was required to turn what were often banal ideas into effective tech-
nology. Hence, I take very seriously Edison’s quip that invention is ‘1 per
cent inspiration and 99 per cent perspiration’. The Industrial Revolution
was primarily an engineering challenge rather than a scientifi c challenge.
Because so much of invention was the hard work of perfecting machin-
ery and new products, it was an economic activity. Consequently, economic
incentives were critical in explaining why that work was done and, hence,
why inventions took place. Research and development became a more com-
mon business activity in the eighteenth century than it had been previously.
Many other explanations have been offered for the Industrial
Revolution. Geographical dichotomies (tropics versus temperate, rain-fed
versus irrigated agriculture, resource-abundant versus resource-scarce,
etc.) have been invoked but face formidable counter-examples as well as
the diffi culty that the purpose of much technology is to overcome the
burdens of nature. Culture has often been invoked (Landes 1969, Clark
2007). Europeans have usually fancied themselves more rational and hard
working than the natives, and social scientists like Max Weber (1904–5)
have given these views some respectability. The agricultural history of the
tropics calls these thoughts into question, however, by showing that
African and Asian farmers responded to economic and environmental
considerations in their choice of crops and farming practices (Hopkins
1973). Less grandly, it has been claimed that cultural developments like
the Scientifi c Revolution of the seventeenth century are responsible for
the Industrial Revolution of the eighteenth. I will take up this view later.
Among economists today, ‘better institutions’ is the most common
explanation for economic development.3 In the case of Britain, the case
3 Proponents of this view include North and Weingast (1989), De Long and Schleifer (1993),
LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Schleifer, Vishny (1998), Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2005).
BRITISH INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE 201
rests on the Glorious Revolution of 1688, which assured parliamentary
ascendancy, limited the power of crown, guaranteed private property, and
prevented arbitrary taxation. Another line of argument is that English
common law was better than French law. These explanations, of course,
are restatements of eighteenth century liberal views.
If we consider the role of institutions and culture in a broader intel-
lectual perspective, however, we notice an odd disjunction. As economists
have been deciding that institutions explain everything, historians have
been coming to the opposite conclusion. They have been re-evaluating
many of the despotic regimes disparaged by the liberals in the eighteenth
century and discovering that they functioned quite well. France, for
instance, looks much better now than it did 250 years ago. Detailed com-
parisons show that France had lower taxes than England (Mathias and
O’Brien 1976, 1978), and that French property was arguably too secure.
Socially profi table irrigation projects, for instance, were not undertaken in
eighteenth-century Provence because there was no legal mechanism for the
compulsory purchase of land. It was only after the revolution and the
ascendancy of the Assemblée nationale in Paris that these projects were
taken forward (Rosenthal 1990). Indeed one could argue that a virtue of
the English Constitution was that Parliament overrode private property
with enclosure acts, turnpike acts, and canal acts. As one historian of
Parliament has remarked, the great achievement of the Glorious Revolution
was that the ‘despotic power [that] was only available intermittently before
1688 . . . was always available thereafter’ (Hoppit, 1996: 126). Indeed, we
see it in action today.
Empire after empire has been rehabilitated. China has fi gured promin-
ently in these discussions, and the so-called California School has argued
that China’s institutions were as good as Europe’s in the eighteenth cen-
tury, and, indeed, its economy was as productive (Wong 1997, Pomeranz
2000). It has also been argued that India had effective enough institutions
to sustain a vast intercontinental trading empire, extensive manufacturing,
large cities and realise high living standards (Parthasarathai 1998, 2001,
Bayly 1989, Chaudhuri 1985). The Roman empire is another example
where revisionist historians claim that imperial power created a large free
trade area and sustained an extensive division of labour, advanced manu-
facturing, and high productivity (Bowman and Wilson 2009, Scheidel,
For critical or contrary perspectives, see Clark (1996), Epstein (2000), Quinn (2001), Hoffman,
Postel-Vinay, Rosenthal (2000), Pomeranz (2000), Mathias and O’Brien (1976, 1978), Hoffman
and Norberg (1994), and Bonney (1999).
202 Robert C. Allen
Morris, and Saller 2007, Ward-Perkins 2005). The revisionists argue that
their empire created internal peace, order and good government. When
these conditions were established over a wide area, interregional trade
expanded and localities exploited their comparative advantage so produc-
tion became spatially differentiated. The legal systems of these empires,
while foreign, turn out to have been adequate to sustain this exchange and
production. The result was high incomes.
In view of these fi ndings, I take my cue from Charles Lockyer, who
was an offi cer on the East India Company ship Streatham. He went to
Asia to make his fortune in private trade. He was a keen student of Asian
markets. He remarked:
Arek, commonly called Bettle-nut from [Burma] would bear all Charges of
Freight, Package and China Duties, and fetch fi fty per Cent. Profi t in Canton on
a large Quantity, towards the End of Anno 1704, which is more than any other
Commodity within my knowledge would do: But this is not always the same; for
the Chinese, who like bees search all the coasts betwixt [India] and their own
Country for Profi t, have undoubtedly long since brought down the Price [in
Canton] by fi lling their Markets with it. (Lockyer 1711, p. 72)
If the Chinese merchants were actively arbitraging markets across Asia, it
shows that their legal arrangements were suffi cient to support extensive
trade, and they were evincing a commercial spirit as well. So it is hard to
believe that China was really held back by bad institutions or a non-
commercial culture. Conversely, if Britain was not blessed with better
culture or better institutions, why did it make the Industrial Revolution?
The demand for technology
To make progress on this question we have to focus on the invention and
adoption of technology, because technological change is the proximate
cause of growth. I use a demand and supply framework. The demand for
technology depended on factor prices, market size, and the imitation of
novel products. Britain’s unusual wage and price structure is a key for
understanding the demand for technology there and why it was different
to that in other countries. The supply of technology was also important,
and it depended on the standard of living and accumulated knowledge,
skills and inventive institutions. North-western Europe (including Britain)
stands out in these regards by virtue of high levels of literacy and numer-
acy, but Britain was not ahead of the Netherlands or present-day Belgium.
The Scientifi c Revolution of the seventeenth century also played a role by
BRITISH INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE 203
providing a couple of key ideas, which were the basis of important
technology.
I begin with the demand for technology, which was determined by
Britain’s unique factor prices. In particular, wages were remarkably high
in Britain, while coal and energy were cheap. This price structure created
a demand for labour-saving, energy-using technology.
British wages were high in four senses. The fi rst is comparison with
wages in other countries. These comparisons require exchange rates, and I
use the silver value of the currencies since silver coins were the principal
medium of exchange. By the eighteenth century, British wages were higher
than those almost anywhere else in the world, as Figure 1 shows.4 This is a
20
15
10
5
0
1375 1475 1575 1675 1775
Figure 1. Labourers’ wages around the world.
4 Figures 1–6 are based on price histories of the cities concerned. With co-authors, I have
computerised these and converted the local weights and measures to metric or engineering units
and the currencies to grams of silver for these comparisons. As a result, we can now compare
wages and prices across Eurasia from the late Middle Ages to the twentieth century. For full
sources and discussion, see Allen (2001, 2007, 2009a, 2009b) and Allen, Bassino, Ma, Moll-
Murata, and van Zanden (2007).
yad
rep
revlis
fo
smarG
London Amsterdam Vienna
Florence Delhi Beijing
204 Robert C. Allen
marked change from the late fi fteenth century when the wage of building
labourers, for instance, was the same everywhere. Beginning in the sixteenth
century, there has been a three-way split. There was little increase in wages
in Central or Eastern Europe. In contrast, in Western Europe, wages rose
during the price revolution (1560–1620), and they rose particularly in
Britain. In the eighteenth century, British wages were higher than Asian
wages, which, of course, is one of the reasons Brits went there to shop!
The second sense in which British wages were high is relative to the
cost of living. Figure 2 shows the wage rate defl ated by an international,
intertemporal consumer price index. I will explain in a moment how it was
calculated. It is a commonplace today that the standard of living is more
or less the same everywhere in Western Europe, so we can ask: when in the
past (if ever) was that last true? The answer is the end of the fi fteenth cen-
tury. At that time real wage differences between European cities were
small. Since then, they have diverged. Real wages in North-western Europe
remained more or less constant from the end of the Middle Ages until the
1870s. (It is remarkable that the Industrial Revolution passes through
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
1375 1475 1575 1675 1775 1875
London Amsterdam Vienna
Florence Delhi Beijing
Figure 2. The subsistence ratio for labourers.
BRITISH INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE 205
these time series without a trace!) The real wage, however, in Central and
Southern Europe dropped. As a result, there was a great divergence of
living standards within Europe before the Industrial Revolution. Also, liv-
ing standards in the Asian cities were on a par with those of Southern and
Central Europe in the eighteenth century—not with England or the Low
Countries. A rich North and a poor South was not a consequence of the
Industrial Revolution but preceded it. Indeed, my argument is that the
Great Divergence caused the Industrial Revolution.
These fi gures have a further interpretation because of the way they have
been scaled. Most of the Central and Eastern European real wage series as
well as the Asian series end up with a value of about one in the eighteenth
century. What that means is that a labourer who worked full-year, full-time
earned just enough money to support a family at a bare-bones standard of
living. This standard was one in which an adult male consumed 1940 calories
per day. The calories came mainly from boiled grains and beans. The diet
was quasi-vegetarian with very little fl esh and some butter or oil. Non-food
items included a few candles, soap, and three metres of cloth for clothing.
There was a 5 per cent allowance for house rent. Table 1 shows the spending
pattern as it was specifi ed for North-western Europe where oatmeal was the
cheapest source of calories. The diet was modifi ed for other parts of the
world to use the cheapest available carbohydrate, that is polenta in Florence,
sorghum in Beijing, millet chipatis in Delhi, rice in Madras, maize in Mexico.
This kind of bare-bones diet was common in most of Asia and Southern
and Central Europe. It was all that labourers could afford.
Table 1. The annual subsistence spending pattern of a man in North-western Europe
Quantity per year Calories per day Grams of protein per day
Foods
Oats 155 kilograms 1657 72
Beans 20 kilograms 187 14
Meat 5 kilograms 34 3
Butter 3 kilograms 60 0
Total 1938 89
Non-foods
Soap 1.3 kilograms
Cotton 3.0 metres
Candles 1.3 kilograms
Lamp oil 1.3 litres
Fuel 2.0 million BTU
Source: Allen (2009a, p. 37), which also gives examples of subsistence based on maize, millet, and
rice. The basket in the table is the consumption pattern of a man. The annual cost of maintaining
a family is taken to be the cost of three of these baskets plus 5% for rent.
206 Robert C. Allen
As Figure 2 shows, labourers in North-western Europe earned four
times bare-bones subsistence in the eighteenth century. They did not eat
four times as much oatmeal as shown in Table 1. Instead, they upgraded
the quality of their food to bread, beer and beef. They also had a bit of
purchasing power left over to buy the Asian commodities like tea and the
manufactured goods of the consumer revolution in the eighteenth century.
That is why the consumer revolution happened in North-western Europe
in the eighteenth century and why it was mainly confi ned to North-western
Europe insofar as it affected the working class.
A third sense in which British wages were high is relative to the cost of
capital goods, and this is critical for the choice of technology and the pro-
cess of invention. Figure 3 shows the builder’s wage rate relative to the user
cost of capital based on the prices of wood, iron, non-ferrous metal, and
bricks and an interest rate and depreciation rate. In Strasbourg, Vienna,
and southern England there was not much difference in the ratio of the
wage rate to the price of capital early in the seventeenth century, but by the
eighteenth century a big differential had emerged. Labour was much more
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
1680 1730 1780
England Strasbourg Vienna
Figure 3. Wages relative to price of capital.
BRITISH INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE 207
expensive relative to capital in Britain, and that difference gave British
businesses a strong incentive to use capital intensive technologies and
British inventors an incentive to invent them.
The fourth sense in which British wages were high was relative to the
price of energy. Figure 4 shows energy prices in different cities early in the
eighteenth century. In this fi gure the prices of the various fuels (coal in
London, peat in Amsterdam, etc.) are reduced to their energy content meas-
ured in British Thermal Units (BTUs). Newcastle had the cheapest energy
since coal was mined there. Beijing had the most expensive energy, Paris was
almost as expensive, while Amsterdam and London were in the middle. The
difference between the price in London and Newcastle refl ects the transpor-
tation costs incurred in shipping the coal down the coast from Newcastle
to London. Coal reached Amsterdam at almost the same price as it was
available in London because it was just as cheap—or as expensive—to send
a boat from Newcastle to Amsterdam as to London.
The low cost of energy on the British coalfi elds meant that the wage
rate relative to the price of energy was very high in Newcastle (Fig. 5).
High British wages also contributed to this result, but cheap coal was the
decisive factor.
10
8
6
4
2
0
Amsterdam London Paris Newcastle Beijing
Figure 4. The price of energy in the early 1700s.
sUTB
noillim
rep
revlis
fo
smarG
Strasbourg
208 Robert C. Allen
5
4
3
2
1
0
Amsterdam London Paris Newcastle Beijing
Contemporaries were aware of these relative prices. An interesting
case in point is the production of plate glass, which was an industry in
which the French were technological leaders. They had a major produc-
tion centre at Saint Gobain, and the British imported the French technol-
ogy to Ravenshead in the late eighteenth century. This was not just theft.
There was cooperation with the French works. Delaunay Deslandes, who
was the director of Saint Gobain, thought this was a quixotic thing for the
British to do because he could not imagine how they could compete
against the French. As he said,
Given the manner in which the English and French lived . . . they could never
make plate [glass] which could enter into competition with ours for the price.
Our Frenchmen eat soup with a little butter and vegetables. They scarcely ever
eat meat. They sometimes drink a little cider but more commonly water. Your
Englishmen eat meat, and a great deal of it, and they drink beer continually in
such a fashion that an Englishman spends three times more than a Frenchman.5
Deslandes was describing the high cost diet that English workers could
afford with their high wages in the eighteenth century. If the British glass
works were going to have to pay these high wages how could they compete
5 Quoted by Harris (1975, p. 67, n. 42).
sUTB
noillim
rep
revlis
fo
smarG
Strasbourg
Figure 5. The price of labour relative to energy, early 1700s.
BRITISH INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE 209
with low-wage French labour? The answer is that English coal cut fuel
costs to one-sixth of the French level. Cheap coal sustained the high-wage
economy.
High wages and cheap energy were the distinctive features of the
British economy during the Industrial Revolution. Where did this price
structure come from? It was a result of Britain’s foreign trade boom in the
seventeenth and eighteenth century (Allen 2003, 2009a, pp. 106–31). The
boom began in the seventeenth century with the new draperies and was
consolidated with the creation of a world empire in the eighteenth. The
trade boom pushed the urbanisation rate from 7 per cent in 1500 to 29 per
cent in 1800, which was one of the highest percentages in Europe. The
growth of London accounts for much of this urbanisation. Its population
rose from about 50,000 in 1500 to 200,000 in 1600, to half a million in
1700, and reached one million in 1800. The growth of the city was driven
by the growth in the volume of trade though the port. The resulting tight
labour markets were the proximate cause of the high wages. They were
sustained eventually by the cheap energy.
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1400 1450 1500 1550 1600 1650 1700 1750 1800
Wood Coal
Figure 6. The real prices of wood and coal in London.
sUTB
noillim
rep
revlis
fo
smarG
210 Robert C. Allen
As London grew, the demand for fuel for industrial purposes and
domestic heating increased as well. At the outset, most of the fuel was
either fi rewood or charcoal, and this had to be shipped over greater and
greater distances at greater and greater cost. Consequently, the price of
fuel rose as the city expanded. Eventually, the prices of wood and char-
coal rose high enough to make it profi table to use coal. Figure 6 charts this
transition. The fi gure shows the real price of fuel, that is the price per
BTU defl ated by a consumer price index. At the end of the Middle Ages
the prices per BTU of wood fuels and coal were similar. Under those cir-
cumstances, coal was only used to burn lime and for blacksmithing, uses
in which it was regarded as superior to wood. In all other uses, wood was
preferred. For heating, cooking, and most industrial processes, coal was
the inferior fuel since it contained sulphur, which burnt with a foul smell
and contaminated industrial processes (Nef 1932, Hatcher 1993).
The price of wood and charcoal rose in the sixteenth century and, by
1580, the price of charcoal per unit of energy was twice the price of coal.
That differential was large enough to induce people to redesign their tech-
nologies, so that they could use the cheaper fuel. Indeed that is when the
coal trade took off.
Technology responded to factor prices
High British wages and cheap coal underpinned the Industrial Revolution
by creating a demand for technology that substituted capital and energy
for labour. In Asia and much of Europe, low wages and dear energy had
the opposite effect. Silk weaving is one example. The English industry
began when the Lombe brothers built a mill in Derby in 1715–19. It was
expensive to erect and was powered by a water wheel, which was a capital-
intensive system. What about the situation in Asia? The Tsukiji silk mill
was built in Japan c.1870. It used European-style machinery, but it was
re-engineered to be more labour-intensive in accord with Japanese factor
proportions. It did not have a water wheel. Instead it was powered by a
man turning a crank—a labour-intensive process, indeed! In England
where labour was very expensive and capital was relatively cheap, a capital-
intensive method was used, whereas in Japan, where labour was cheap, a
labour-intensive method was preferred. Factor prices infl uenced the choice
of technique at the opposite ends of Eurasia.
BRITISH INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE 211
Figure 7. An English-style pottery kiln.
Another example that relates to energy is pottery production in China
and England. Pottery kilns in England were built to economise on capital
and were profl igate in their use of energy. Figure 7 shows an English-style
kiln. It had a coal fi re in the bottom. The heat rose, enveloped the pots,
and then vented out of the furnace through the hole in the top. Much of
the energy was wasted. The English kiln was cheap to build but not ther-
mally effi cient. In contrast, the Chinese kilns used lots of capital and
employed lots of labour to preserve energy. Figure 8 shows a fi re at the
entrance to the lower chamber where the heat was drawn in to bake the
pots. The heat was not vented out of a hole in the top in the English man-
ner. Instead, it was forced down through a hole at the bottom into the next
chamber. The heat was reused in chamber after chamber, so it was not
wasted. This design, of course, equated to more capital. Pottery kilns,
therefore, are another example of the way in which technology was
designed in response to factor prices. In this case, expensive fuel in China
led to the substitution of capital for energy, in contrast to English design.
The same considerations governed invention in Europe. Nail making
is a prosaic example. One of the steps in making nails is putting the head
212 Robert C. Allen
Figure 8. A Chinese-style pottery kiln.
on the nail. In Britain at the end of the seventeenth century a machine was
developed to mechanise that process. It was called the oliver. It was a
device like a sledgehammer. The shaft was hinged at the base. The head of
the ‘hammer’ had a hole in which a dye was placed to shape the head of
the nail. The hammer was raised with a foot pedal and then released so the
head would drop on a nail and shape it. In contrast, in French nail shops
there was no oliver. Again we have a situation where the low-wage country,
France, was using the more labour-intensive process.
The two stages of technological evolution
The history of technology is a two-stage process. So far I have been dis-
cussing the fi rst stage. It includes the famous macro-inventions of the
Industrial Revolution—the spinning machinery, coke blast furnaces,
weaving machines, and steam engines. These involved substantial changes
in input proportions. They radically increased the amount of coal that
was used, for instance, or increased capital relative to labour. They turn
out to have been profi table at British input prices because they used inten-
BRITISH INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE 213
sively things that were cheap in Britain. At the outset, however, they barely
covered costs, even in Britain. Despite the fact that a hundred years later
these machines revolutionised the world, in the beginning they just barely
paid their way.
The second stage of the history of technology comprises the improve-
ment of the revolutionary machines. This is the phase of micro-inventions.
Engineers, owners, and operators studied the machines to improve them.
The objective was to reduce costs, and, in the event, all inputs were saved,
irrespective of whether they were abundant or scarce. Eventually a tipping
point was reached when it became profi table to use these technologies (in
their improved form) outside Britain. That is when the Industrial
Revolution spread around the world.
We can illustrate the two stages with isoquant diagrams. In the mid-
eighteenth century, the only way to make coarse cotton yarn was with a
spinning wheel. In Figure 9, this is represented by a single point corres-
ponding to the labour of one woman and the cost of a wheel. Together
they produced one pound of yarn per day. Two isocost lines are drawn—
one for a high-wage economy and one for a low-wage economy. Both
K*
K
L* L
Figure 9. Isoquants for spinning yarn: mid-eighteenth century.
latipaC
Isoquant for new
technique
Isoquant for old
technique
High wage
Low wage cost line
cost lines
Labour
214 Robert C. Allen
touch the single point of the isoquant since that represents the only way
to make cotton whatever your factor prices.
The spinning jenny is represented on the diagram with another point
with more capital and less labour. With a jenny, a woman could spin one
pound of coarse yarn in a couple of hours rather than a full day, but the
jenny cost considerably more than the wheel. As the points are drawn, it
would have been profi table to adopt the jenny in the high-wage economy,
but it would have raised costs in the low-wage economy, so it would not
have been used there. In 1787, over 20,000 jennies were installed in Britain
but only 900 were installed in France in 1790, and most of those were in
large state-assisted factories rather than in women’s cottages as in England
(Aspin and Chapman 1964, p. 49, Wadsworth and Mann 1931, pp. 195–9,
503–4). This diagram illustrates the important point that biased technical
changes do not cut costs in the same proportion everywhere. The reduc-
tion depends on factor prices, so biased technical change favours some
parts of the world over others. The technologies that were invented in
Britain raised labour productivity and covered their costs only when they
were used under the conditions of Britain in the eighteenth century.
K*
K
L* L
Figure 10. Isoquants for spinning yarn after technological improvements.
latipaC
Isoquant for new
technique
Tipping point
Isoquant for old
technique
Low wage cost line
Trajectory of
improvements
High wage cost line
Labour
BRITISH INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE 215
Table 2. Adult literacy, 1500–1800: percentage of the adult population that could sign its
name.
1500 1800
England 6 53
Netherlands 10 68
Belgium 10 49
Germany 6 35
France 7 37
Austria/Hungary 6 21
Poland 6 21
Italy 9 22
Spain 9 20
Source: Allen (2009a, p. 53).
The second stage of technological development proceeded in this way:
British engineers learned how to improve the spinning jenny as they used
it and studied it. The mule was one of the fi rst spin-offs, and improved
versions of it were used in many countries in the middle of the nineteenth
century. This trajectory of improvement is represented by the arrow
towards the origin in Figure 10. As the technology was improved, labour
and capital were saved. By installing the fi rst cotton spinning machines,
Britain became the world’s technological leader, and the subsequent
improvements extended Britain’s lead. Historians as well as contemporar-
ies have debated why France was not keeping up. Was it bad entrepreneurs
or an engineering culture that was too theoretical? In fact, it was neither.
At the end of the eighteenth century, it did not pay to spin with machines
in France. Eventually, however, enough inputs were saved so that the cost
of producing cotton with the improved process dropped below the cost of
spinning with a wheel even in the low-wage country—like France. That
juncture was the tipping point when the industrial revolution shifted
abroad. Indeed, there was a great leap forward as the foreigners adopted
the technology in its most advanced form. That, of course, was the only
form that paid, given their lower wages.
The supply of technology
Thus far, my argument has been about the demand for technology. There
was also a supply-side story that is prompted by the observation that not
all high-wage economies have invented labour-saving machinery. The late
Middle Ages had a high-wage economy, but it did not lead to an Industrial
216 Robert C. Allen
Revolution. Why not? The answer has two parts. First, commerce and
urbanisation were more widespread in the eighteenth century than they
had been in the Middle Ages, and trade and cities led to high levels of
human capital. Second, the Scientifi c Revolution of the seventeenth century
included scientifi c discoveries that led to two important technologies.
First, with respect to human capital, Table 2 shows estimates of liter-
acy rates in different countries (defi ned on modern borders) in 1500 and
1800. These estimates are based on the proportions of people who could
sign their name. In 1500, literacy was low everywhere. By 1800 it was
higher everywhere and especially in North-western Europe. One explana-
tion for the rise in literacy is the Protestant Reformation. This is doubtful,
however, since the highly literate parts of Europe in 1800 included Belgium
and North-eastern France, which were Catholic countries. The driving
force behind literacy was really urbanisation and the expansion of com-
mercial society. Literacy was valuable in trade and cities, and that value
led parents to pay for schooling for their children. So far as we can tell
from phenomena like age heaping, numeracy also increased in the early
modern period in North-western Europe (Thomas 1987, A’Hearn, Baten,
and Crayen 2009). Few people studied arithmetic for fun; the acquisition
of numerical skill was entirely driven by economic value.
Second, the Scientifi c Revolution was another important difference
between the Middle Ages and the eighteenth century. Some historians have
emphasised its impact on the culture at large, but I concentrate on specifi c
connections between scientifi c discoveries and technological advances. Two
discoveries were bases for two General Purpose Technologies (GPTs). The
concept of General Purpose Technology was inspired by the computer and
refers to technologies that can be adapted to many sectors of the economy.
In the Industrial Revolution, the GPTs were steam power and ‘clockwork’,
or gearing. Both had connections to the Scientifi c Revolution, although in
the case of gearing the relationship was a distant one. Both technologies
required Research and Development (R&D) projects to make them effec-
tive in the various settings. The R&D projects were more profi table in
Britain than elsewhere, which is why the Industrial Revolution was invented
in Britain, as I will show you.
The steam engine was an important application of knowledge dis-
covered by seventeenth-century scientists.6 The science began with Galileo,
6 Standard works on the history of the steam engine include Farey (1827), Dickinson (1939,
1958), Forbes (1958), Hills (1970, pp. 134–207, 1989), Nuvolari (2004), and von Tunzelmann
(1978).
BRITISH INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE 217
Figure 11. von Guericke’s apparatus.
who was the fi rst to suspect that the atmosphere had weight. The idea
occurred to him when he studied the problem of draining mines and
noticed that suction pumps would not lift water more than about thirty
feet. He put his secretary Evangelista Torricelli to work on this project.
Torricelli invented the mercury barometer and weighed the atmosphere.
In 1672, von Guericke of Magdebourg designed the apparatus shown in
Figure 11, also to weigh the atmosphere. The cylinder, which is labelled A,
contained a piston from which ropes went over the pulleys to hold the
platform on which he put weights. He found that by pumping the air out
of the cylinder the atmosphere pushed the piston down and raised the
platform. He could offset that rise and weigh the atmosphere by putting
weights on the platform. In 1675 Denis Papin eliminated the vacuum
pump by fi lling the cylinder with steam and then condensing it. Papin had
invented a proto-steam engine.
The von Guerick experiment shown in Figure 11 is similar to the fi rst
successful steam engine invented by Newcomen in 1712 (Fig. 12).
Newcomen’s engine has the cylinder on the right (B) with a piston (D) in
it. Instead of the pulleys, there is a balance beam (HF) and, instead of the
weights on the left, there is a pump (I) for lifting water out of a mine. By
fi lling the cylinder with steam from the boiler (A) and then condensing it
with a squirt of cold water (B), the atmosphere would push the piston
down and raise the pump. When the vacuum was relieved, the weights (K)
above the pump pulled the left end of the beam down, steam was allowed
to enter the cylinder, and the cycle was repeated. Newcomen had found
218 Robert C. Allen
Figure 12. Newcomen’s steam engine.
a way to raise water—and make money—from the weight of the
atmosphere.
The science underlying the steam engine was pan-European (the lead-
ing scientists were Italians, Germans, and French), but the R&D was car-
ried out in Britain by an Englishman. The reason is that Britain was the
only place where it was profi table to use the engine on a large scale, for two
reasons. First, the main use of the engine was to drain mines, and Britain
had the largest mining industry in Europe thanks to coal. Second, the
engine used prodigious amounts of fuel, and coal mines offered cheap
fuel. John Theophilus Desaguliers, a leading engineer in the early eight-
eenth century, observed that ‘where there is no water [for power] to be
had, and coals are cheap, the Engine now call’d the Fire Engine, or the
Engine to raise the Water by Fire, is the best and most effectual. But it is
especially of immense service (so as to be now of general use) in the Coal-
Works, where the Power of the Fire is made from the Refuse of the Coals,
which would not otherwise be sold’ (Desaguliers 1744, II, pp. 464–5). The
reason it was profi table to develop the Newcomen engine in Britain was
because there were coal mines to be drained.
BRITISH INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE 219
50
40
30
20
10
0
1727 1747 1767 1787 1807 1827 1847
Newcomen Watt
Cornish–Best Cornish–Average
Figure 13. Coal consumption in pumping engines (lbs per HP-hour).
Newcomen’s engine was the macro-invention that marked the fi rst phase
of this technological trajectory. The second phase consisted of the perfec-
tion of the engine and involved many of the most famous engineers of the
Industrial Revolution. This phase involved saving all inputs and, in particu-
lar, coal, which was cheap in Britain. Figure 13 shows the evolution of fuel
consumption in pumping engines from an early Newcomen engine in 1727
to the highly effi cient engines of the mid-nineteenth century. It includes the
contributions of John Smeaton, James Watt, Richard Trevithick, Arthur
Woolf, and the many engineers who improved Cornish engines. Fuel con-
sumption dropped from 44 pounds of coal per horsepower-hour in 1727 to
3 pounds in 1847. This improvement was a triumph for British engineering,
and it also destroyed the country’s competitive advantage by turning the
steam engine, which had mainly benefi ted Britain in the early eighteenth
century, into a technology that could be used anywhere in the world. Once
the coal consumption was reduced to 3 pounds per horsepower-hour, the
price of coal became irrelevant to the engine’s commercial application.
220 Robert C. Allen
British engineers had invented the ‘appropriate technology’ for the rest of
the world.
Clockwork was the second General Purpose Technology in the
Industrial Revolution.7 Clockwork refers to the use of gears to control and
distribute power in machinery. Gears had been used for a long time.
Medieval gears, however, were usually large, wooden, and crude. By the
eighteenth century, gears had become small, metallic, and precise. The
improvement in gears goes back to the invention of the pendulum clock by
Christiaan Huygens in 1656. He was, of course, a world-class scientist and
mathematician, and he was working on a world-class scientifi c problem.
This was the measurement of longitude, and it had come to the fore with
global navigation. The solution was easy if you knew the time difference
between your location and Greenwich, and that was simple if you carried
a time piece set to Greenwich Mean Time. The problem was designing an
accurate clock or watch. Huygens realised that he could improve the accu-
racy of a clock by adding a pendulum. The result was a better clock, and
the clock industry expanded considerably. However, Huygens’ clock was
not a satisfactory solution to the longitude problem since a pendulum
clock did not keep good time on a ship pitching at sea. Huygens did not
give up, however. He applied himself to improving the accuracy of watches
and invented the coiled spring. This greatly improved their accuracy,
although again not enough to determine longitude with suffi cient preci-
sion. Nonetheless, the watch industry grew enormously since the more
accurate watches were in demand. Attention was directed towards improv-
ing the production of gears. In 1656, each gear had to be laid out by hand
on a sheet of brass with a protractor. The teeth were marked and then sawn
out individually with a fi le. In the second half of the seventeenth century,
machines were developed that did the laying out and cutting automatically
with the result that, by the eighteenth century, gears had become not only
cheaper but also standardised and more accurate.
Gears had uses besides watches. Early applications included auto-
mata—clockwork toys, some of which were very elaborate. One of the
most famous was the duck made by the great French engineer Vaucanson.
The duck walked across the fl oor eating and pooping. It was a great hit at
Versailles; according to Voltaire, ‘Without Vaucanson’s duck, you would
have nothing to remind you of the glory of France.’ Of course, if you
could control the movement of a toy duck with gears, perhaps you could
do something useful like spin yarn or weave cloth. Edmund Cartwright,
7 On the history of clocks and watches, see Weiss (1982) and Landes (2000).
BRITISH INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE 221
the inventor of the power loom, was inspired in part by automata, and the
distribution of power to the rollers in Arkwright’s water frame was called
‘the clock work’ since it used gears like a watch or clock. Indeed, Arkwright
hired clockmakers over a fi ve-year period to design it.
The possibility of using gears to design machinery was greatest where
gears were made. As it happens, Britain had the largest watchmaking
industry in the world since the high-wage economy sustained a high
demand for watches. While fi nal assembly was done in London, the watch
movements themselves were outsourced to southern Lancashire. Preston
and Warrington had large industries making gears and supporting indus-
tries that made the tooling to make the gears. The watchmakers and the
toolmakers provided the ‘high tech’ inputs to produce textile machinery in
the 1780s and 1790s. Britain’s success in ‘practical skills and engineering’,
which has often been identifi ed as a cause of her industrial success, was
the result of her earlier success in watchmaking.
The economic basis of the Industrial Revolution
Both steam power and clockwork were rooted in scientifi c discovery;
nonetheless, they illustrate the importance of incentives in explaining
eighteenth-century inventions. This lecture has advanced an economic
explanation of the Industrial Revolution that involves three key ideas
relating to incentives:
• Engineering problems were the crux of invention;
• The engineering problems were addressed in response to economic
incentives resulting from Britain’s high wages and cheap energy;
and
• The famous inventions of the Industrial Revolution were made in
Britain because it paid to invent them in Britain, not because the
British were more practical, more enterprising, or better governed.
References
Acemoglu, Daren, Johnson, Simon, and Robinson, James (2005), ‘The rise of Europe:
Atlantic trade, institutional change and economic growth’, American Economic
Review, 95: 546–79.
222 Robert C. Allen
A’Hearn, Brian, Baten, Jörg, and Crayen, Dorothee (2009), ‘Quantifying quantitative
literacy: age heaping and the history of human capital’, Journal of Economic
History, 69: 783–808.
Allen, Robert C. (2001), ‘The great divergence in European wages and prices from the
Middle Ages to the First World War’, Explorations in Economic History, 38: 411–47.
Allen, Robert C. (2003), ‘Poverty and progress in Early Modern Europe’, Economic
History Review, 56: 403–43.
Allen, Robert C. (2007), ‘India in the Great Divergence’, in Timothy J. Hatton, Kevin H.
O’Rourke, and Alan M. Taylor (eds.), The New Comparative Economic History:
Essays in Honor of Jeffery G. Williamson (Cambridge, MA), pp. 9–32.
Allen, Robert C. (2009a), The British Industrial Revolution in Global Perspective
(Cambridge).
Allen, Robert C. (2009b), ‘The Industrial Revolution in miniature: the spinning jenny
in Britain, France, and India’, Journal of Economic History, 69: 901–27.
Allen, Robert C., Bassino, Jean-Paul, Ma, Debin, Moll-Murata, Christine, and van
Zanden, Jan Luiten (with Jean-Pascal Bassino, Debin Ma, Christine Moll-Murata,
and Jan Luiten van Zanden) (2007), ‘Wages, prices, and living standards in China,
1739–1925: in comparison with Europe, Japan, and India’ (Oxford, Oxford
University, Department of Economics, Working Paper 316, forthcoming in
Economic History Review).
Ashton, T. S. (1955), An Economic History of England: the 18th Century (London).
Aspin, C., and Chapman, S. D. (1964), James Hargreaves and the Spinning Jenny
(Preston, Helmshore Local History Society).
Bayly, C. A. (1989), Imperial Meridian: the British Empire and the World, 1780–1830
(London).
Bonney, Richard (1999), The Rise of the Fiscal State in Europe, c.1200–1815 (Oxford).
Bowman, Alan and Wilson, Andrew (eds.) (2009), Quantifying the Roman Economy:
Methods and Problems (Oxford).
Chaudhuri, K. N. (1985), Trade and Civilisation in the Indian Ocean: an Economic
History from the Rise of Islam to 1750 (Cambridge).
Clark, Greg (1996), ‘The political foundations of modern economic growth: England,
1540–1800’, Journal of Interdisciplinary History, 26: 563–87.
Clark, Greg (2007), A Farewell to Alms (Princeton, NJ).
Crafts, N. F. R. (1985), British Economic Growth during the Industrial Revolution
(Oxford).
Crafts, N. F. R. and Harley, C. K. (1992), ‘Output growth and the British Industrial
Revolution: a restatement of the Crafts–Harley view’, Economic History Review,
2nd series, 45: 703–30.
Crafts, N. F. R. and Harley, C. K. (2000), ‘Simulating the two views of the Industrial
Revolution’, Journal of Economic History, 60: 819–41.
De Long, J. Bradford and Schleifer, Andrei (1993), ‘Princes and merchants: European
city growth before the Industrial Revolution’, Journal of Law and Economics, 36:
671–702.
Desaguliers, J. T. (1734–44), A Course of Experimental Philosophy (London).
Dickinson, H. W. (1939), A Short History of the Steam Engine (Cambridge).
BRITISH INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE 223
Dickinson, H. W. (1958), ‘The steam-engine to 1830’, in Charles Singer, E. J. Holmyard,
A. R. Hall and Trevor I. Williams (eds.), A History of Technology, Vol. IV, The
Industrial Revolution, c.1750– c.1850 (Oxford), pp. 168–98.
Epstein, S. R. (2000), Freedom and Growth: the rise of States and Markets in Europe,
1300–1750 (London).
Farey, John (1827), A Treatise on the Steam Engine, Historical, Practical, and
Descriptive (London).
Forbes, R. J. (1958), ‘Power to 1850’, in Charles Singer, E. J. Holmyard, A. R. Hall and
Trevor I. Williams (eds.), A History of Technology, Vol. IV, The Industrial
Revolution, c.1750–c.1850 (Oxford), pp. 148–67.
Harris, J. R. (1975), ‘Saint-Gobain and Ravenshead’, in Barrie M. Ratcliffe (ed.),
Great Britain and Her World, 1750–1914 (Manchester), pp. 27–70.
Hatcher, J. (1993), The History of the British Coal Industry, Vol. I, Before 1700: Towards
the Age of Coal (Oxford).
Hills, Richard L. (1970), Power in the Industrial Revolution (Manchester).
Hills, Richard L. (1989), Power from Steam: a History of the Stationary Steam Engine
(Cambridge).
Hoffman, Philip T. and Norberg, Kathryn (1994), Fiscal Crises, Liberty, and
Representative Government, 1450–1789 (Stanford, CA).
Hoffman, Philip T., Postel-Vinay, Gilles, and Rosenthal, Jean-Laurent (2000), Priceless
Markets: the Political Economy of Credit in Paris, 1660–1870 (Chicago, IL).
Hopkins, Anthony G. (1973), An Economic History of West Africa (London).
Hoppit, Julian (1996), ‘Patterns of Parliamentary legislation, 1600–1800’, The History
Journal, 39: 109–31.
Landes, David S. (1969), The Unbound Prometheus: Technological Change and
Industrial Development in Western Europe from 1750 to the Present (Cambridge).
Landes, David S. (2000), Revolution in Time: Clocks and the Making of the Modern
World (revised edition) (London).
LaPorta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Schleifer, A. and Vishny, R. W. (1998), ‘Law and
fi nance’, Journal of Political Economy, 106: 1113–55.
Lockyer, Charles (1711), An Account of the Trade in India (London).
Mathias, P. and O’Brien, P. K. (1976), ‘Taxation in England and France, 1715–1810’,
Journal of European Economic History, 5: 601–50.
Mathias, P. and O’Brien, P. K. (1978), ‘The incidence of taxes and the burden of
proof’, Journal of European Economic History, 7: 211–13.
Nef, J. U. (1932), The Rise of the British Coal Industry (London).
North, D. C. and Weingast, B. R. (1989), ‘Constitutions and commitment: evolution
of institutions governing public choice in seventeenth-century England’, Journal
of Economic History, 49: 803–32.
Nuvolari, Alessandro (2004a), The Making of Steam Power Technology: a Study of
Technical Change during the Industrial Revolution (Eindhoven).
Parthasarathi, P. (1998), ‘Rethinking wages and competitiveness in the eighteenth
century: Britain and South India’, Past & Present, 158: 79–109.
Parthasarathi, P. (2001), The Transition to a Colonial Economy. Weavers, Merchants
and Kings in South India, 1720–1800 (Cambridge).
Pomeranz, K. (2000), The Great Divergence: China, Europe, and the Making of the
Modern World (Princeton, NJ).
224 Robert C. Allen
Quinn, Stephen (2001), ‘The Glorious Revolution’s effect on English private fi nance: a
microhistory, 1680–1705’, Journal of Economic History, 61: 593–615.
Rosenthal, J.-L. (1990), ‘The development of irrigation in Provence, 1700–1860: the
French Revolution and economic growth’, Journal of Economic History, 50: 615– 38.
Scheidel, Walter, Morris, Ian, and Saller, Richard (2007), The Cambridge Economic
History of the Greco-Roman World (Cambridge).
Temin, Peter (1997), ‘Two views of the British Industrial Revolution’, Journal of
Economic History, 57: 63–82.
Thomas, Keith (1987), ‘Numeracy in Early Modern England: the Prothero Lecture’,
Transactions of the Royal Historical Society, 5th series, 37: 103–32.
von Tunzelmann, G. N. (1978), Steam Power and British Industrialization to 1860
(Oxford).
Wadsworth, Alfred P. and Mann, Julia de Lacy (1931), The Cotton Trade and Industrial
Lancashire, 1600–1780 (Manchester).
Ward-Perkins, Bryan (2005), The Fall of Rome and the End of Civilization (Oxford).
Weber, Max (1904–5), The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, translated by
Talcott Parsons (London, 1930).
Weiss, Leonard (1982), Watch-Making in England (London).
Wong, R. Bin (1997), China Transformed: Historical Change and the Limits of European
Experience (Ithaca, NY).