Summary: The Major Gifts Officer is responsible for managing relationships with major gift prospects determined to have the ability to make gifts at or above the $10,000 level. This position is charged with developing and implementing strategies for securing financial support from a portfolio of prospects, approximately 100-125, including identifying, qualifying, cultivating, soliciting, and stewarding major gifts for The Frick Pittsburgh. The Major Gift Officer will work independently and also as a member of the Advancement team - coordinating activities with those of the team.
Reports to: Director of Advancement & Engagement (DAE) Hours: Monday – Friday, 9:00-5:00, hybrid options, some evening and weekend work Status: Full-time, Exempt with benefits Salary Range: $79,191-$87,990 based on experience
Essential Responsibilities:
Works independently and is self-motivated in initiating contact with potential donors.
Manages a caseload of active major gift prospects and implements and executes strategies for solicitation of these prospects, ensuring regular interaction through face-to-face meetings, mail/email/telephone, online meetings, campus meetings, and events.
Assumes and achieves annual fundraising activity and performance goals, including 50-100 in-person prospect meetings; submission of 10-20 major gift-level proposals
Drafts research profiles, contact reports, gift and solicitation strategies, proposals, and other correspondence for prospects; processes gift commitments expeditiously.
Makes numerous decisions on portfolio management, including donor cultivation, proposal and solicitation planning, and relationship management, both internally and externally. Effectively manages use of travel time and travel and entertainment budget.
Work collegially with the Advancement Team, Executive Director, Board Chair and Directors in creating and implementing strategies for cultivation, solicitation, and closure.
Ability to communicate and interact verbally, both in person and over the phone
Ability to use personal computers and other office equipment effectively.
Ability to work periodic evening and weekend events.
Ability to work on site as part of a high-functioning, highly collaborative team
Completes other duties as assigned.
Required Qualifications:
3-5 years of successful fundraising experience
MS Windows experience required  (experience with Tessitura a plus).
Friendly, professional manner
Demonstrated strong writing skills
Clearance of a criminal background check
Possess the ability to work independently and is self-motivated
Excellent organizational skills with attention to detail
Proven experience (minimum three years) in major individual gift fundraising and in cultivating and soliciting prospects capable of significant gifts.
Thorough knowledge of fundraising and solicitation policies, procedures, and methods.
Broad knowledge of principles of fundraising and an ability to participate in all aspects of the gift cycle.
Ability to act as a proactive “prospector” who can handle duties beyond direct fundraising that ultimately support prospect discovery, cultivation and engagement, eventually resulting in higher levels of philanthropy.
Ability and willingness to perform and embrace other duties as assigned or directed.
Emotional intelligence.
Excellent organizational, project management, multi-tasking, and leadership skills.
Exceptional communication (verbal/written), listening, and follow-through skills; collegial and respectful manner.
Ability to work independently within the boundaries of standard development practices and codes of conduct from the AFP.
Impeccable integrity and high ethical standards.
Demonstrated experience in consistently meeting deadlines/deliverables and standards for quality work.
Entrepreneurial approach to problem-solving and demonstrated success in exceeding goals and expectations.
About The Frick Pittsburgh: Located on the estate of 19th-century industrialist Henry Clay Frick, The Frick Pittsburgh offers authentic experiences with art, history and nature that inspire and delight. Visitors of all ages and backgrounds are warmly welcomed to explore The Frick Art Museum, offering world-class collections of European art and Chinese porcelain alongside an active schedule of temporary exhibitions; Clayton, the Frick family’s French château-style mansion (remodeled by architect Frederick J. Osterling in the 1890s); the Car and Carriage Museum; and a large working greenhouse designed by architects Alden & Harlow—all nestled on ten acres of beautifully landscaped lawns and gardens in Pittsburgh’s East End. Amenities include an Education Center, the Frick children’s playhouse (also designed by Alden & Harlow), The Café at the Frick, and the Grable Visitor Center, which houses the Frick Museum Store. Information about The Frick Pittsburgh is available online at TheFrickPittsburgh.org.
The Frick Pittsburgh is an Equal Opportunity Employer that is committed to fostering a workplace culture of accessibility, inclusion, diversity, and racial equality and urges all qualified diverse applicants to apply.