Greg Lowry, the Walter J. Blenko, Sr. Professor of Civil & Environmental Engineering and Director of New Initiatives, aims to grow this formational gift into an externally funded interdisciplinary center on Engineering Resilience for Climate Adaptation.
“The Rankins’ generous commitment will enable teams of researchers to develop and deploy a suite of novel methods, tools and analyses needed to improve the resilience of engineering infrastructure designs and communities, and provide critical resources needed to support the establishment of a center of excellence and a well-trusted source in this area,” Burcu Akinci, who heads the civil & environmental engineering department, says.
Resilience is the key to enhancing harmony between the natural and physical world to proactively reduce and withstand the impact of climate change. While climate adaptation builds on a system of thinking that integrates climate change modeling with the development of effective and equitable adaptation solutions. The result is a holistic approach within which nature, built environments and societies are able to thrive.
“We are fortunate that the Rankins’ desire to invest in a more climate-secure and sustainable future aligns so well with our strengths in energy and climate change research and its translation to practice,” Professor of Engineering and Public Policy Valerie Karplus says.
In recognition of their transformative gift, the Rankins will be inaugural Grand Challenge Partners of the Wilton E. Scott Institute for Energy Innovation , where Karplus serves as associate director.
Yeming earned her undergraduate degree in computer science from the School of Computer Science in 2005. Aaron earned his undergraduate degree in information systems from the Dietrich College of Humanities and Social Sciences and a master’s degree in information systems management from the Heinz College in 2004.
The Rankins invest in climate tech, energy transition and sustainability through their family office, Rankin Ventures . The foundation arm of Rankin Ventures supports philanthropic causes related to sustainability and health, as well as community and economic development in the Greater Chicago area.