Connected Consumption
The Adrich platform uses smart labels to turn everyday products into “smart” products. Users apply a label to a product and connect it to a smartphone app. Intelligent sensors in the label track consumption, and users receive a notification when a product is running low. If desired, a smart replenishment feature automatically re-orders, too, crossing an item off a user’s to-do list before it even appears. This “need-based” subscription model addresses the problems of other subscribe-and-save programs. With those, users often receive too much product or run out of product. With Adhithi’s platform, she strives for users to have the amount they need when they need it.
The platform and labels also make it easier for brands to understand and connect with consumers. When it comes to privacy and information, users maintain complete control, and they can opt-in to share high-level consumption data with brands. This gives brands real-time insights about how, when and where their products are being used but also ensures that an individual’s privacy is protected, too.
The platform is already live in Europe with plans to launch in Asia later this year.
“This year is a new chapter,” Adhithi says. “We are going international. We are making a lot of product, and we have some new manufacturing partners that are helping us scale.”
The company already has a strategic partnership with Amazon, and their customer base is growing to include household names like Clorox.
Adhithi is working with Clorox to develop reusable smart bottles. Each bottle includes the Adrich logo and an intelligent sensor label.
“We are helping the planet by reducing single-use plastics,” Adhithi says. “That’s one other area that I'm really excited about.”
Adhithi is also enthusiastic about the growth of her team.
“I brought on some senior leadership who believe in the business and can take it to the next level,” she says. “I’m really excited about that, and our set of investors. They've been very supportive during the ups and downs of the company.”