Art, a first love, became incorporated in her studies at CMU where she earned a minor in art (painting) and, later, when she continued her studies at the University of Texas at Austin in fine arts. Now, 28 years later, her combined interests contribute to her success designing galleries in New York City.
“I spent a lot of time on my grandparents’ farms,” she says. “I learned to appreciate and love the land and environment, and what you need to do to maintain, conserve and restore it. All of this comes full circle with our Living on Net Zero project and our urban initiatives in New York.”
Net Zero, described as “off the grid 54 miles from Times Square,” is Betty’s connection to her roots. Although her professional work showcases some of the world’s greatest art galleries, her personal work highlights her ongoing dedication to the natural environment. Even while maintaining her New York City apartment with husband and business partner Michael Chirigos, there came a time when the family recognized that having a strong connection to the outdoors to raise their family was important to them.
They found Oak Island, a community highlighted in The New York Times , where their house at the time was covered in vines and looked a bit like a chicken coop, she remembers. The island was, and still is, like stepping back in time — no public utilities for electricity, gas or water; emergency services provided by fireboats and all trash hauled off the island by owners. Undaunted, Betty, Michael and their kids, ages 4 and 2 at the time, felt like they had come home and thought they might thrive there, learning about the land and living in harmony with it.
They bought their home and became part of the community, sharing the island with 50 other neighbors. The family eventually installed solar panels and lighting, made renovations to the home, keeping its original structure intact while updating — always with the natural environment in mind. The children learned to “plant what you can eat,” embraced raising vegetables and oysters, foraging beach plums and berries, and, most recently, adding scallops to their aquafarm.