Double Major, Double Mileage
When Leah decided to attend Carnegie Mellon, she knew it would take a lot of heart — and work.
“Carnegie Mellon was definitely the option that was extremely daunting to me,” Leah says. “It was the one that felt like the biggest challenge, and I didn't know if I would succeed.”
Despite her doubts, she set herself on a pre-med track and pursued a double major in biomedical and materials science engineering. She also took up long-distance running.
“Running really kept me balanced,” Leah says. “It prioritized my well-being while I was pursuing what was an extremely difficult course load.”
As the end of her senior year approached, she decided to train for her first marathon.
“Having a goal in mind, like a marathon, helped me focus on my academics,” Leah says. “But it also allowed me to take a step back from academics and enjoy all aspects and facets of my life and what makes me me.”
Leah crossed the finish line of the DICK’S Sporting Goods Pittsburgh Marathon on May 9, 2013.
She crossed the stage to receive her bachelor’s degrees at CMU’s Commencement 10 days later.
Pursuing Her Passion
As Leah prepared to graduate from Carnegie Mellon, she felt a lot of pressure about her future.
“I was hearing a lot of noise around me that I should pursue pre-med. I should be a doctor, I should do this, I should do that,” Leah says. “I knew that wasn't what I wanted to do.”
She was offered a job in the biomedical engineering field, but she turned it down for a year of service with AmeriCorps.
She was assigned to the National Health Corps branch in Pittsburgh and spent a year at the Shadyside Family Health Center working in primary care and diabetes management. She optimized the medical record system, coordinated quality improvement efforts and conducted patient self-management consults.
After AmeriCorps, Leah completed a two-year post-baccalaureate research fellowship at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland.
“That was some of the best research I've been able to participate in,” Leah says. “I had a phenomenal experience and so much autonomy as a young researcher.”