Made in New York
Founding Lunar was a right time, right place moment for Sean.
He received a master’s degree in human-computer interaction from CMU in 2014, and then moved to New York City to work for a tech startup.
“I had a big itch for entrepreneurship, which is the reason why I went into startups here in New York,” Sean says. “My first preference was to get into agencies and consultancies, very much like the MHCI program, which is based around the agency and consultancy model. But at that time, the in-house roles were definitely booming, both in terms of prospects and pay potential, too. I figured at least I'd start with a startup role where I can wear a bunch of different hats and understand the balance of building the perfect product versus a good product.”
He went on to work in product management and user experience roles at other startups in various funding stages, and even received what he calls a “mini in-person MBA” from the CEO of Prescriptive Data, an artificial intelligence smart buildings company.
“As that was going on, I think more and more I gravitated towards the idea of starting my own business,” Sean says. “It was a little bit of a right place, right time, right mindset. The lightbulbs went off and I decided to venture into consumer packaged goods.”
Lunar was launched at the end of 2020. Since then, the company has won distribution deals with major retailers in and around New York City, including Whole Foods, Trader Joe’s and H Mart.
The brand is a departure from Sean’s business and tech background, but he can see parallels.
“I call this industry half CPG, half service or hospitality,” Sean says. “It is a very relationship-heavy industry still. Lots of business is done on handshakes and eye contact and business cards and a drink or dinner. There is a lot of that component, just given the nature of the industry. It's only as of late where there are the newcomers to the industry like myself, who come from a more traditional tech or business background, who are doing things a little more agilely or differently. But the bare bones in the industry still remain the same.”