Lameck’s work involved testing and validating a bioreactor that would allow the group to assess what effect stretching muscles during growth has on how strong those muscles become. He was tasked with determining the position of the fixtures the muscles would be attached to and how to control them, so they moved the way the team wanted them to move.
As part of the work to create biodegradable robots, Lameck learned to make what are called phantoms, which are like analogues for muscle tissue. So rather than growing muscle and trying to stretch meshes with actual muscle on them, Lameck was fabricating meshes out of silicon, with little fake silicon muscles, to try to compare how the meshes deformed when they’re stretched to a computational model the lab had created.
Prior to receiving a SURF award, Lameck worked with his Ph.D. student mentor Saul Schaffer. As a result of this work, Lameck was a co-author on a published research paper .
A native of Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, Lameck says when he was deciding where to attend college, he had an impression of CMU as a challenging school, but liked the idea of being able to do research as an undergraduate.
“I didn’t really know what undergrad research looked like before I came here,” he says.
But he found it manageable, especially with the encouragement of fellow students who motivated him to work hard.
“In engineering it’s nice to have like-minded peers. People who are in the same situation as you, who want to achieve great things,” he says.
Lameck has embraced the opportunity to take classes outside his area of expertise including history and psychology. In addition to his course work, Lameck is a peer mentor for CMU’s Student Academic Success Center and is a residential assistant at one of the dorms for first-year students.
Lameck says he’s still debating whether he wants to attend graduate school, but he added that having research experience as an undergraduate is great to have under his belt. He does know that he wants to go into the biomedical devices field to create things that will help people with disabilities.
“I think it’s really interesting that a lot of what we’re learning is going to be useful,” Lameck says. “It’s really nice to know that your time is so well spent.”