First Lessons
Growing up in St. Thomas, one of the U.S. Virgin Islands, both of Wayne’s parents were educators.
“Our home was always filled with kids coming in for help,” he says. “That was just what I knew. They never said you have to be a teacher, but I guess it was in my blood all along.”
He was a kid who “tried everything but didn’t stick with anything” except music. Playing the saxophone and the steel drums, he performed in the Rose Bowl Parade and on a cruise to Venezuela in high school. When The Drifters — the R&B group behind classics like “Under the Boardwalk” and “This Magic Moment” — came to town, he was part of their backing band and arranged compositions for his fellow musicians by listening to the group’s tapes.
As a senior, he was part of an arts program through the University of Miami. The program sent him college applications to numerous schools with excellent music programs.
“Carnegie Mellon gave me the most money, so my mom said, ‘OK, I guess that’s where you’re going,’ even though neither of my parents had ever been to the continental U.S.,” Wayne says.
Strangely enough, his sister, who was age 17 to his 16, started college the same year at nearby Duquesne University. After a whirlwind weekend of getting their children established on neighboring campuses, his parents returned to their home in the Caribbean.
“They told me to be good, make some good friends and don’t mess this up,” he says. “If you mess up this scholarship, you'll be right back at home, and we can't afford to bring you home until next summer."
So he listened.
As he figured out how to navigate his first chilly and icy winters as a teenager, he earned his bachelor’s degree in saxophone performance and K-12 teacher certification studying with Associate Teaching Professor of Clarinet Thomas Thompson and jazz musician Eric Kloss among other CMU faculty.
“It has been a joy watching Wayne’s outstanding growth as a musician, an educator and an administrator,” says Professor Emerita of Music Education Natalie Ozeas, his lifelong mentor who still checks in regularly. “His commitment to his students’ development has been inspiring to me, Pittsburgh Public Schools teachers and, I am sure, to my students at Carnegie Mellon.”
For Wayne, he believes that “CMU was probably one of the best decisions I ever made.”
“I had great teachers, and I had a great experience that felt like I was in a conservatory in a university setting,” Wayne says. “I'm just proud that somebody from the music department could become a superintendent, which is not traditional. I felt like I was well prepared from my lessons at CMU to take on that challenge. I will always thank CMU for that.”