Taylor also learned important lessons from associate professor Dannie Durand, whose phylogenetics course about the evolutionary history of organisms taught her how to analyze scientific data, and teaching professor and MCS associate dean for undergraduate affairs Maggie Braun, who encouraged her to get creative with internships to be competitive in the field.
That creativity is exactly what led Taylor to bioacoustics.
Creating a Career
Part way through her degree program, Taylor added a second major. She wanted to pursue her interest in both science and social behavior, and CMU’s interdisciplinary curriculum made it possible.
She graduated from the Mellon College of Science in 2014 with bachelor’s degrees in biological sciences and psychology, and spent the next two years doing various internships in marine mammal research.
Two of those internships — studying dolphins in Florida and southern right whales in Argentina — involved bioacoustics, and the work piqued her interest.
“It was the first time that I realized how much behavior you can learn about from studying what the animals are saying and sounds underwater,” Taylor says.
It was also the first time she heard about Hal Whitehead, a university research professor at Dalhousie University in Nova Scotia who studies the social behavior and communication of deep-water whales.
Hal eventually became Taylor’s Ph.D. supervisor at Dalhousie, overseeing her thesis work on sperm whales.
“If I look back at my time at CMU, having this biology and psychology and social behavior interest and then realizing, through these internships, that I really liked acoustics work, it makes sense that I then ended up doing my Ph.D. on sperm whale social communication with Hal,” she says.
Rigorous Research
Taylor received her Ph.D. in biology from Dalhousie University in 2022.
She has continued to work in bioacoustics, completing postdoctoral research positions with the Comparative Bioacoustics Group, where she studied harbor seals and African penguins in the Netherlands, and with the Marine Mammal Institute at Oregon State University, where she studied bottlenose dolphins and bowhead whales.
In 2024, she was named one of five women in science awardees by L’Oreal USA, receiving a $60,000 grant to support her research. It was a huge honor for Taylor, and it taught her an important lesson about the value of her work.
“I almost didn’t apply,” she says. “I was looking at the past women who'd been awarded it and didn't see someone doing anything quite like what I do. So I thought that meant I wasn't a good candidate for it. But that actually was what they liked. They are trying to support women in very diverse disciplines within science and tech. I think it was a good reminder that you miss every shot you don't take. And it was just really validating.”
In April, Taylor began a three-year fellowship with the Human Frontier Science Program at the University of Bristol in Bristol, England, where she is studying a specific type of whistle produced by bottlenose dolphins.
Like with her other postdoctoral positions, she expects to spend a few months in the field collecting data. It can be hard work, but it’s also very rewarding.
“I think what I've loved the most about my job is that it's taken me to beautiful places and I've gotten to see amazing animals just living their lives,” she says. “I think that's my favorite part. And it makes the experience of then coming back to the office, where we are for a lot of the year, more special.
“Most of the time you're processing and analyzing the data you've collected. But I find that if you've had a hand in collecting it, it just makes it very fulfilling to then be working with it later.”
She’s also learned a lot about the research process along the way, including the amount of time it takes to produce a result.
“You have to learn to be comfortable with the fact that [for] some things you're not going to have a product right away,” Taylor says. “You never know how long things are going to take. And I think I've gotten better at accepting that. But it's been a learning process.”
For Taylor, the long hours and hard work are worth it, because it means she’s advocating for, and protecting, animals.
“I think that my work and this field shows us that these animals have these rich lives, and that is worthy of protecting in and of itself,” Taylor says. “Not for some service they can provide us, you know, an ecosystem service or a tourism service, but just that they have a right to live out their lives as unimpeded as possible. And I think communication can help people understand that.”