It Takes a Vast Village
Susan’s journey with CORE started early, and she credits her mother and two sisters, who were also nurses, with instilling in her a passion for the organization’s mission.
“Witnessing their hard work and dedication to serving others deeply motivated and inspired me,” she says.
CORE is one of 57 nonprofit organ procurement organizations, or OPOs, across the United States. The 250-member team’s makeup is diverse, including administrators, surgeons and procurement coordinators — who often double as critical care nurses — funeral directors, employees who train at technical schools to learn how to scrub, support staff, finance staff, IT workers and regulatory professionals.
Early in her career at CORE, Susan was instrumental in crafting the PA Act 102 law of 1994, known as “Routine Referral,” alongside colleagues at Latrobe Hospital. In the past, identifying a potential organ donor was voluntary, and Routine Referral established a process for hospitals statewide to mandate the referral of a potential organ donor to their local OPO.
In just three years, PA donations increased 43%, compared to 6% nationally, and this early legislation became a model for other states.
Following this success, Susan earned a Master of Public Management from CMU’s Heinz College of Information Systems and Public Policy in 1997. She credits that experience with helping her develop crucial leadership skills and a robust professional network filled with contacts from various leadership backgrounds and with diverse perspectives.
“I chose Heinz due to its outstanding reputation. Highly recommended by colleagues, I was confident that the learning environment would significantly advance my professional career,” she says. “I had high hopes for professional growth through this experience, and the stellar reputation of Heinz reassured me of that potential."
Susan has used her Heinz education and passion for the work to guide what she calls “CORE’s decade-plus-long performance excellence journey,” culminating in the organization winning a Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award, a national recognition for organizational performance excellence, in 2019.
That same year, Susan participated in a year-long fellowship with the Baldrige Executives Fellow program, which focuses on assisting organizations to more efficiently accomplish their missions and connected her with Baldrige organizations throughout the county to learn directly from their leadership. CORE is one of only three OPOs that have participated in the program.
In June 2023, Susan was recognized with a Lifetime Achievement Award given by the Association of Organ Procurement Organizations, which honors people who have made significant contributions in the field of organ donation.