The Solution to the Problem
As students settled back into traditional academic settings post-pandemic, Brittany and Black Girl MATHgic came to a crossroads. In late spring 2024, she shifted her business model from direct to consumer to business to business. The new sister brand, Math = Me , offers kits directly to schools, school districts, and learning programs or youth-serving organizations (like Girl Scouts, a customer of hers). Families will still be able to buy past boxes from Black Girl MATHgic’s online store.
“We need to reach [students] through their schools, through their districts, through their informal learning programs,” Brittany says. “That will not only allow us to grow in scale, but also to reach more children quicker and at a higher rate because at this point we really don’t have time to waste. We don’t have time for our children to not be able to participate in a STEM-focused world. We have AI now. We don’t want them to just be consuming AI, we want them to be creating AI. You can’t do that without a foundation in basic mathematics.”
2+2=4
Brittany, a Detroit native and the daughter of a retired school principal, remembers that math was always her favorite subject growing up, and she often tutored peers and younger students. It wasn’t until she got to Spelman College in Atlanta and switched to a math major that she encountered math that was hard for her. She had to retake a couple classes and took advantage of professors’ office hours and study groups in order to keep up.
When Brittany graduated she had trouble convincing employers that her math degree prepared her to contribute to their companies. A few “odd jobs” introduced her to data-driven marketing, and she found herself loving it.
She searched for a graduate business program that offered mathematical marketing and came across the Tepper School’s MBA program, which offered an analytical marketing track.
She emailed a Tepper student who had attended the same small high school she did and asked about her experience there. The young woman encouraged Brittany to visit Carnegie Mellon for the MBA Admissions Diversity Weekend, and as she says, “the rest is history.”
Brittany points to a public speaking class taught by Evelyn Pierce, emerita teaching professor of business management communication, that particularly prepared her to start Black Girl MATHgic. She was terrified of public speaking when she arrived in Pittsburgh, but Pierce required everyone to present up front and give both positive and negative feedback to each speaker at every class. As she improved and became less nervous, she started to seek out similar classes that improved her presenting skills. She credits those skills with allowing her to secure financial support and avoid relying on venture capital.
“Since I started my business in 2019, I have won almost a quarter of a million dollars in grants and pitch competitions,” she says. “With the pitch competitions, it’s you getting up in front of an audience and convincing the judges to give you funding. I would not be as comfortable as I am without the Tepper training ground.”