Building a Better Burger
Dan and Audley also made it a point to work on the food robot. They built the first prototype around 2006 in Audley’s dad’s garage.
It was as big as the garage and operated like the kitchen of a restaurant, instead of a standalone machine.
It wasn’t the food robot of the future, but it was a start.
The recession of 2008 hit soon after they built the first prototype, so they took a hiatus until they could secure further funding. They also had to address food safety and sanitation concerns.
In 2018, Audley resumed work on the burger machine in his living room. During that time, he convinced Dan and Andy to join him. They officially founded RoboBurger in 2019.
“That's when we really took it to the next level in terms of actually being able to get some of these contraptions working together in sync, starting to do the dance that we called 'Making a Burger,'” Audley says.
Once the prototype was working, they also had to tackle the taste. That’s where Dan stepped in, sharing his knowledge of the food industry and his love of cooking.
“That was what drew me to this,” Dan says. “It's my background of understanding why good food tastes good, how to apply the proper cooking techniques to get the great final product and a whole lot of engineering and process design to lump it all together.”
Today, RoboBurger is the only hot food vending machine certified by the National Sanitary Foundation, and the food and beverage industry is taking notice.
“It's been a real journey,” Audley says. “We're super excited to finally be at the point we're at now and working with some of the largest food and beverage organizations and moving these units throughout the world.”
As RoboBurger grows, Dan and Audley’s ideas for the future are growing with it. They’re already planning to adapt the technology for different foods and listening to consumers along the way.
“It's taking what we have in the technology now and getting more and more of these machines out into market and using that momentum to continue funding research and development on exactly what is next,” Dan says. “We had the idea for the burger machine because we were hungry, and we like burgers. But your own passion only takes you so far, you’ve got to see that this is a product for serving other people, and their feedback is what guides our next steps.”