Early Adopter
Blake started at Carnegie Mellon during what should’ve been his senior year of high school and graduated in only three years leaving campus at age 20.
“I applied as a junior in high school, and CMU was my top choice,” Blake says. “I had to write an essay showing that there was nothing left for me to pursue academically at my high school and complete an on-campus interview. They liked me and invited me to be a freshman.”
“Looking back, choosing to come to CMU was one of the top five most important decisions I’ve ever made. I’m so grateful CMU was willing to do it, and it’s so emblematic of what I really love about the CMU culture. There are rules, but they can all be bent and broken with good reason."
Between his second and third years, during an internship with InGAME in the Bay Area, he realized he was only one exit down the highway from a small airport.
He’d loved planes and flying for as long as he can remember. He started flying lessons during his internship and earned his pilot’s license a few years later.
“As a kid, the first time I made the connection between a toy and making an airplane, I just lit up,” he says. “Flying is challenging in this wonderful way. There’s a physical skill and cerebral action to it. It’s right there at that intersection.”
At CMU, courses challenged and transformed him, too.
“Steven Rudich’s 15-251 (Great Ideas in Theoretical Computer Science) changed my life the second semester of my freshman year,” Blake says. “Learning from him how to communicate, how to teach and how to explain was absolutely life-changing. How I'm able to get other people excited about supersonic flight, I feel like I'm channeling everything I learned from him.”
After graduation he spent more than a decade in the tech sphere at Amazon, Groupon and Kima Labs, a startup he co-founded, before deciding it was time for something new.
“I thought I would get two weeks into the research of supersonic, understand why it was a bad idea and move on,” Blake says. “Instead, I spent the next year getting educated on aerospace engineering. I took remedial physics, remedial calculus, an airplane design class. I read every textbook I could find, and I was doing problem sets.”
After learning his calculations and assumptions were conservative, he jumped in.
“It was a very easy decision to go for it because I knew I’d forever regret not trying,” Blake says. “I would be OK trying and failing, but I wouldn’t be OK with not having tried.”