Patenting Progress
After graduating from CMU, Danamichele earned a master’s degree in operations research and decision sciences from the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. She then accepted a job at Rosenbluth International, a corporate travel management company.
“I really wanted to apply my technology background to business or to public policy or something,” she says. “I wanted to solve big problems, like I saw these fellows at CMU doing.”
While at Rosenbluth, she invented a system, which was later a patented, to reverse the impact of airline yield management pricing, a strategy where airlines adjust ticket prices and seat availability to maximize revenue. By using Danamichele’s patented advanced technology system, corporations like Kodak and Intel were able to negotiate airfare pricing.
“It put them on a level playing field,” she says. “So not only did it save these corporations millions of dollars, but it also enabled our travel company to transition from a transactional business model to a management service, where our expertise and our patents and our technology were bringing value to the corporate travel program.
“I was able to invent the technology, but I was also able to experience the commercialization of it. That was incredible. It was exactly what I wanted. I wanted to see a big, meaningful business problem and apply advanced technology to solve it.”
Danamichele continued solving “big business problems” later in her career. As chief technology officer and senior vice president at Jackson Hewitt Tax Service, she led the deployment of machine learning in the call center, allowing the company to onshore jobs back to the U.S. from the Philippines. Under her leadership, Jackson Hewitt also received IRS approval for the industry's first electronic storage and signature, and invented the first self-service tax preparation application.
As general manager at Ancestry.com, Danamichele helped deploy advanced technology to the professional genealogy division, where users could hire an expert to do the research for them.
“We were using machine learning and we were even beginning to use some large language models for a lot of stuff because it was large-scale databases and searching,” she says. “Now, years later, the AI is really addressing some of those issues. But that was exciting and I was able to scale that division globally so I got even more global experience.”
Busting Bad Bank Data
In 2023, Danamichele and her husband, Lester Dye, decided to combine their talents to start badbank.ai .
“We had a couple of small businesses going and were just so frustrated with the accounting systems and their inability to give you understandable knowledge about your transaction,” she says.
Lester, a Stanford engineer with extensive background in computer science, computational fluid mechanics and machine learning, left his Ph.D. program with venture funding to commercialize his thesis research. He has since founded multiple companies, applying advanced computational methods to challenges in fluid mechanics and finance. Recent years of experience in modern AI provided the foundation for the computational model powering Badbank.ai.
“We were like ‘Gosh, this could really help every single small business in the world who just needs to understand and see their expenses combined and aggregated and cleaned up,’” Danamichele says.
Since launching the company, Danamichele and Lester have helped small businesses around the country save money and reconcile their financial records. They are currently preparing for a new release, have patents pending in the U.S. and internationally, and are looking to apply the badbank technology on a global scale.
It’s one more “big business problem” that Danamichele is excited to tackle. And that CMU planner? It served as a reminder of the place that first inspired her to do so.
“It was fun to think about how lucky I've been and how so much of this really did start at CMU,” she says. “It was just fortuitous that I opened up that little planner. All of this stuff that I didn't realize at the time was going to be, for decades, so impactful to everything that I did.”