Trendy Topics
Throughout her career, Kaki has focused on bringing trends, both old and new, to younger generations.
“I love to see the evolution of how the cultural environment — the cultural geist, shall we say — is always changing,” she says. “It is fun to see how quickly different generations evolve to new things.”
She spent four years working for VICE media, where she used “new things” like short-form documentaries, three- to five-minute mini pieces and YouTube-style content to market to millennials.
As vice president of content marketing at Sony Music Entertainment, she worked with Michael Jackson’s estate to create an award-winning immersive experience for the 40th anniversary of “Thriller.” She also worked on an integrated marketing campaign for Mariah Carey’s song, “All I Want for Christmas.” The campaign helped the song reach No. 1 on the Billboard Hot 100 List, a ranking which earned Mariah a Guinness World Record for highest-charting (Christmas/New Year) song on the U.S. Hot 100 chart by a solo artist.
“My team had the fun challenge, on the 25th anniversary, of trying to make a 25-year-old song a number one hit, and it was the first time that anyone had ever done it,” she says. “And we did that through an extensive, very complicated content matrix of driving new views every day, animated videos, and finding ways to appeal to Gen Z consumers and young audiences that had never experienced the song.”
Now, at Super League, she’s helping brands and artists market to Generation Alpha through custom video game integrations. The integrations give users a fun, immersive experience and provide brands with valuable consumer insights.
“We are able to track impressions and click-through rates and engagement and feedback as people are going through different experiences, whether they collect digital avatar items that they wear and carry with them into other games, or perhaps it's a branded burrito from Chipotle, or different experiences like that,” she says. “And they're immersing themselves in a different language of brand love, so to speak. And it's really exciting because the gaming world is changing faster than most other experiences.”
Kaki is still doing the thing she loves most: working with and supporting the music industry.
“We’re finding ways to get artists into gaming platforms for the first time,” she says. “Right now, we’re working with Bebe Rexha. We just did a pop-up in Roblox for her , which was very exciting.”