“We looked at other areas, other jurisdictions like Europe, that we felt were developing very prescriptive approaches to regulating AI that would not work because of the speed of tech development,” Jonathan says. “So we were very keen to develop a flexible, adaptive approach in the U.K.”
They created a principles-based framework that existing regulators can use to drive safe, responsible AI innovation in their respective sectors. Like Jonathan’s earlier work, it focuses on how new AI technologies will be used, rather than the specifics of how those technologies work.
“The trick with AI is, of course, that it works in finance, it works in healthcare, it works in the military and in all of these totally different areas,” he says. “You need whoever regulates those initial areas to remain in charge of regulating those things. And you need maybe a little bit of coordination at the center. So that was our approach to the whole thing.”
When his political party lost the general election in July 2024, Jonathan became a shadow minister. Shadow ministers take the lead on specific policy areas for their party and question and challenge their counterpart in the prime minister’s cabinet.
“We are called the official opposition,” he says. “I have a portfolio for AI and other aspects of science and tech and I question the minister in parliament. I used to have to answer the questions, now I get to ask them.”
Although he is no longer in charge of regulatory activities, he believes the U.K.’s new administration supports the framework that he and his team developed.
“I think it is standing the test of time,” Jonathan says. “We'll see where the current government wants to take it now. But I have the impression they are very much on the same page.”
Either way, he’s happy he had a chance to tackle the tough questions.
“Unlike other areas that governments have to work on, the spread between the best outcome and the worst outcome — as we used to describe it, the utopia dystopia spread — is enormous,” Jonathan says. “AI, for instance, can lead to more peaceful, longer, happier, wiser lives for all humans, or it can lead to absolute chaos. And the same is true for almost all aspects of science and tech. So it's a fascinating area to work on and move between all of these competing outcomes.”