“Coming to Tepper was part of my journey of pursuing excellence,” says Anthony, who is a board member and adviser in the private equity arena after years as CEO. “It prepares you for anything. It taught me problem-solving skills; forged a great experience and lifelong network; and was financially rewarding. It, frankly, helped me build a legacy.”
“Paul and I want to help others build their careers, giving back so they, too, can build legacies. The school changes lives. It creates opportunity, not just personally, professionally and financially, but in so many other ways.”
“Tepper was highly transformational in my life,” says Paul, a former chairman and CEO of Boehringer Ingelheim USA who is now with venture capital firm Canaan. He also serves as a board member and adviser to various organizations and on the Business Board of Advisors. “I’m convinced I wouldn’t have been able to do the things that I did, including leading large enterprises and groups of people, without that experience.”
The fellowship is a tangible and meaningful way for the class to “pay it forward.”
“This class gift is special in that we’re creating a rolling legacy that helps a deserving individual to advance each and every year,” Paul says. “Importantly, we can continually add to it and make it more powerful.”
“Endowed fellowships like these are critical in attracting and retaining a highly talented and diverse student body,” says Steve Schultz, associate director of annual giving at Tepper School of Business and committee liaison. “They help ensure that the most qualified students have access to an education that will prepare them to become successful business leaders.”
The small class has remained “very close” over the years, maintaining strong, personal friendships and enjoying reunions.
“Many of us keep in touch regularly,” Anthony says. “We’ve helped each other throughout that 35 years with careers, family and more. Reunions are a good way to stay connected, both with classmates and professors.”
“Reunions let me see how the school continues to evolve, reconnect with folks,” Paul says. “I’ve attended almost all of them.”