Editor on the Rise
Nikita began work at Legendary Comics in Los Angeles, California, as a summer intern in 2016 while she pursued her master’s degree in entertainment industry management , a joint program of the College of Fine Arts and Heinz College of Information Systems and Public Policy.
Like other students in the dual-city program, Nikita split her two years of study between Pittsburgh and LA.
“Thinking of next career steps, I knew I wanted to work in entertainment and move to LA, and I thought, ‘This program is exactly what I need.’”
CMU’s focus on quantitative management and strategic skills sealed the deal.
She graduated from the program in 2017, becoming an assistant editor at Legendary Comics in 2018 and a senior editor in 2021.
“Comics are popular for all ages these days from kids to teens to adult readers,” she says. “TV series like ‘The Walking Dead’ have helped popularize the graphic novel, and a real appreciation for comics and graphic novels has grown over the years.”
In her current role, Nikita listens to book pitches; manages Legendary’s young adult social media accounts; assists with business-to-consumer and business-to-business marketing; and connects with writers, artists and agents in an effort to find original, new material to publish. She works with authors on story development and reviews each script, providing constructive notes page-by-page alongside each artist. Right now, she is juggling seven projects, overseeing them from the initial pitch throughout the publishing of the book.
Of her many projects, some of her recent favorites include “Enola Holmes,” “The Heart Hunter” and “Championess.”
Nikita loves working with artists and writers to talk through their stories, guide them to think through their narrative arc and figure out what makes a compelling script or comic book page.
“As long as you have great relatable characters that you care about and that you can follow on their journeys, that’s what I think makes a great story,” she says.