“This is what people call a renderer exploit,” Seunghyun says. “With renderer exploits, attackers can obtain native code execution in a lower-privileged renderer process, which is the process that literally renders your website. Renderer exploits are often the first step for an attacker to gain full control over a target device by combining other bugs.”
Upon discovering the series of bugs, Seunghyun reported them to Google via the Google Bug Hunters program. Representatives from Google triaged the vulnerability and confirmed it as a systemic issue that needed to be addressed, and one that was eligible for bounty compensation through its vulnerability reward program.
But rather than accept the bug bounty himself, Seunghyun has chosen to donate it to picoCTF, Carnegie Mellon’s cybersecurity competition and learning platform that teaches middle, high school, and college students technical security skills through a capture-the-flag (CTF) competition.
“I wanted to donate the bounty to picoCTF because I started my cybersecurity career by playing CTFs as a student, solving previous challenges and ‘wargame’ challenges,” Seunghyun says. “And I believe that was really a driving force for me to learn much more.
“picoCTF is a great platform that allows new students to get on board with cybersecurity,” he adds.
Google has matched Seunghyun’s bounty donation to picoCTF, leading to a total gift of $462,000 for the platform, which is offered free of charge to more than 600,000 active users across the globe. The gift is the single largest donation to picoCTF in its 12-year history.
“Seunghyun’s generous donation underscores the importance of supporting cybersecurity education by contributing to the resources we need to significantly enhance picoCTF’s ability to reach more students,” says Megan Kearns, picoCTF program director. “It empowers us to continue innovating and delivering high-quality, accessible training to the next generation of cybersecurity professionals.”
“Seunghyun exemplifies the power of using your skills to uplift others and inspires us all to make meaningful contributions to the cybersecurity community.”
Seunghyun’s goal is to continue to address these challenges through his research to help make the internet a more secure place for users. And he hopes that his gift might inspire other bug bounty hunters to contribute to picoCTF.
“When companies match these bounties, donations can be a particularly beneficial option for ethical hackers,” Megan says.
“For most security researchers, the ultimate goal is to create a system that automatically discovers and patches these bugs,” Seunghyun says. “We just currently lack the capabilities to do so. I want to continue to address these problems by developing a system that automatically finds exploitable bugs so that we can fix them in a timely manner.”