Faculty Dialogues, Carnegie Mellon’s signature academic program for alumni, allows you to hear directly from innovative faculty as they discuss their research and how it is changing the world for the better in exciting webinar presentations.
Outcome of a brain injury is notoriously difficult to predict. Some patients recover fully, others suffer from effects throughout their lives. The talk will present novel noninvasive technologies to improve patient stratification and, separately, a new technique for brain stimulation that can help improve outcomes for those suffering from executive function deficits following the injury.
Faculty Dialogues Spring 2025
March 5 - Revolutionizing Brain Injury Care: Noninvasive Solutions for Diagnosis and Treatment The outcome of a brain injury is notoriously difficult to predict. Some patients recover fully, others suffer from effects throughout their lives. The talk will present novel noninvasive technologies to improve patient stratification and, separately, a new technique for brain stimulation that can help improve outcomes for those suffering from executive function deficits following the injury. Hosted by Pulkit Grover , Angel Jordan Associate Professor, Electrical & Computer Engineering, Biomedical Engineering and Carnegie Mellon Neuroscience Institute. Event recording coming soon.
The outcome of a brain injury is notoriously difficult to predict. Some patients recover fully, others suffer from effects throughout their lives. The talk will present novel noninvasive technologies to improve patient stratification and, separately, a new technique for brain stimulation that can help improve outcomes for those suffering from executive function deficits following the injury. Hosted by Pulkit Grover , Angel Jordan Associate Professor, Electrical & Computer Engineering, Biomedical Engineering and Carnegie Mellon Neuroscience Institute.
Event recording coming soon.
March 26, 4 p.m. ET - IDeATe and ETC: Exploring the Intersection of Technology and Creativity The fusion of technology and creativity is fostering interdisciplinary teams equipped to tackle challenges and solve problems. Join faculty from the Entertainment Technology Center and IDeATe for a discussion about the intersection of technology, innovation and creativity, and how it’s cultivating a new generation of thinkers and doers ready to make an impact. Featuring: Keith Webster , Helen and Henry Posner, Jr. Dean of the University Libraries; Director of Emerging and Integrative Media Initiatives Brenda Bakker Harger , Professor of Entertainment Technology, Entertainment Technology Center Derek Ham , Director, Entertainment Technology Center Richard Nisa , Associate Dean, IDeATe Register by Tuesday, March 25
The fusion of technology and creativity is fostering interdisciplinary teams equipped to tackle challenges and solve problems. Join faculty from the Entertainment Technology Center and IDeATe for a discussion about the intersection of technology, innovation and creativity, and how it’s cultivating a new generation of thinkers and doers ready to make an impact.
Featuring: Keith Webster , Helen and Henry Posner, Jr. Dean of the University Libraries; Director of Emerging and Integrative Media Initiatives Brenda Bakker Harger , Professor of Entertainment Technology, Entertainment Technology Center Derek Ham , Director, Entertainment Technology Center Richard Nisa , Associate Dean, IDeATe
Keith Webster , Helen and Henry Posner, Jr. Dean of the University Libraries; Director of Emerging and Integrative Media Initiatives
Brenda Bakker Harger , Professor of Entertainment Technology, Entertainment Technology Center
Derek Ham , Director, Entertainment Technology Center
Richard Nisa , Associate Dean, IDeATe
Register by Tuesday, March 25
Early June - The Impact of Artificial Intelligence in Advancing Brain Research Join Timothy Verstynen , Professor of Psychology, and other faculty from the Neuroscience Institute as they discuss using the latest AI tools to further brain research. Registration information coming soon.
Join Timothy Verstynen , Professor of Psychology, and other faculty from the Neuroscience Institute as they discuss using the latest AI tools to further brain research.
Registration information coming soon.