By Amanda S.F. Hartle
From operatic stages and virtual worlds to industrial warehouses and medical research labs, Carnegie Mellon University’s 2024 Tartans on the Rise are transforming the planet through their artistic expression, scientific exploration, entrepreneurial spirit and visionary innovations.
Now in its third year, Tartans on the Rise celebrates alumni who graduated in the last 10 years and are making an impact on their organizations and in their communities, across the nation and around the world through leadership, innovation and career accomplishments.
“Alongside the entire Carnegie Mellon University community, I congratulate this year’s class of Tartans on the Rise,” said President Farnam Jahanian. “The passion, creativity and leadership of these remarkable Tartans truly embody the CMU spirit. We're inspired by their successes to date and eager to see how they'll shape the future."
These recent alumni are reducing workplace accidents with computer vision, developing technology to prevent HIV infections and promoting inclusion in beauty and cosmetics. They’re driving data-centric solutions to improve air quality and helping veterans to transition successfully to civilian life. And they’re breaking barriers that create systemic poverty and amplifying underrepresented voices through architectural design.
“CMU’s Tartans on the Rise are elevating and enhancing industries, communities and people everywhere,” said Teresa Trombetta (HNZ 2018), assistant vice president for alumni and constituent engagement. “I am so thrilled to celebrate the contributions of these incredible members of our Tartan community.”
The 2024 cohort includes alumni who have founded multiple companies and others who have been honored with such prizes as the H&M Foundation’s Global Change Award and the Metropolitan Opera’s Eric and Dominique Laffont Competition for emerging artists.
One has been selected for Poynter Institute’s Leadership Academy for Women in Media and another designed costumes for a Sundance Film Festival-winning movie. One starred in one of Netflix’s most-streamed shows, another drafted award-winning pieces for Scientific American and Massive Science and one creates YouTube content enjoyed by millions.
They’ve been recognized as Forbes 30 Under 30 leaders and in the publication’s AI 50 listing, and by Fast Company for their startups’ top-ranking AI innovations. Others have been recognized by Publisher’s Weekly, MIT Review Young Innovator and the Global Economic Forum.
This year’s Tartans on the Rise are a part of notable organizations like NASA, Amazon, Disney Theatrical, Sony Masterworks, Google, Danaher and the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation.
Meet the 2024 Tartans on the Rise: