Frank Brunckhorst, a Carnegie Mellon University alumnus and member of its Board of Trustees, has made a $5 million gift to create an endowed headship in the university’s Mellon College of Science. The gift will establish the Trustee Head of the Department of Biological Sciences. This generous endowment reflects a deep commitment to support the emerging priorities of the department and contribute to progress on research projects like the exploration of undiscovered neural pathways, more accessible magnification methods and breakthroughs into leukemia genes.
“A gift like this is a game-changer — it will help us attract a bold, visionary leader eager to shape the future of the life sciences at CMU,” said Barbara Shinn-Cunningham, the Glen de Vries Dean of the Mellon College of Science. “We’re deeply grateful to Frank for his generosity and his belief in the power of foundational science and education to make a real difference in the world.”
The Department of Biological Sciences is a nationally recognized leader in life sciences research and education. The department focuses on high-impact research areas, including molecular biology and genetics, developmental biology, cell biology, neuroscience, microbiology, biochemistry and biophysics, genomics and computational biology.  The college currently is conducting a search for the next head of the department.
“Science advances when we challenge limits and explore the unknown,” Brunckhorst said. “This gift will help CMU attract leaders who will expand the boundaries of life sciences and open new frontiers of discovery. I am thrilled and honored to participate in this important work.”
Born and raised in New York City, Brunckhorst is an alumnus of the Tepper School of Business. He serves on the board of directors and is the former chairman of Boar’s Head Provisions, which was founded by his grandfather. He was first elected to the CMU Board of Trustees in 2005, and has been a significant supporter of the university, making gifts to endowed scholarships, funds for CMU students in need during the COVID-19 pandemic, the Neuroscience Institute and the Richard King Mellon Hall of Sciences, among other areas.
This gift is the second endowed headship at the Mellon College of Science and is part of Make Possible: The Campaign for Carnegie Mellon University , the $2.5 billion campaign that is accelerating the university’s strategic priorities and initiatives across its seven schools and colleges.