At CMU, Omar saw the need for what he calls “scaffolding” to help attract, encourage and engage under-resourced students.
“‘Scaffolding’ refers to curriculum supports that address issues of equity,” Omar says. “People are not equally prepared for the same curriculum, so sometimes a scaffold is a laptop, sometimes it’s an additional instructor or sometimes it’s a mentor who helps a student realize that they belong here.”
Paul, Ria and Omar worked together to translate what had been created in Baltimore at the middle and high school-levels and apply it to Omar’s vision for a more diverse and holistic architecture department at CMU. From that collaboration, the Jacob Family Endowed Fund for Diversity in Architecture was born and will serve as the foundation for critical scaffolding to be built.
The fund provides support that the School of Architecture can use now to jump start this effort with current students, and over the next few years, the couple will permanently endow the fund. With this two-pronged philanthropic strategy, opportunities for students will be supported in perpetuity.
For Ria, a major need at many universities is for the connections that students develop organically to grow into supportive programming that students can utilize for years to come.
“At lot of kids come to college and don’t see people like them or don’t have a big support system, so they don’t feel comfortable,” Ria says. “In many cases, students form groups of their own to talk about their experiences. But at some point, those students will move on, so you have to have a plan in place to maintain that level of support, so students feel confident — academically and personally — to stay in the program.”
Omar agrees with the need for support beyond the syllabus.
“These students are like family, and we need to do everything we can to make this work for each and every person,” Omar says. “We want all of our students to graduate from this program because we know they’re going to make a huge difference in this profession.’”
To evaluate the success of the fund, the measurements are simple: Are students staying, and are they thriving?
To Omar, the fund is already making an impact by providing hope and promise within the School of Architecture for a richer and more robust student experience.
“I couldn’t be happier about this partnership. It gives us all a tremendous amount of confidence as we look to the future.”