When Anish Menon was finishing his master's degree in electrical and computer engineering at Carnegie Mellon in 2011, the economy was rebuilding after a recession. He attended a career fair, and a university publication ran a quote from his reaction to the fair: "free stuff, no interviews."
But since then, Anish has found he has two strengths for building a career: his growing professional network and his ability to adapt in different roles. After stints at Qualcomm and Apple, he landed at Netflix in 2022. As a senior security software engineer, he assesses new features for security risks and works across teams to optimize solutions.
Netflix has proven to be a cool place to work — in addition to getting early access to shows and movies (he's a fan of “Stranger Things”), Anish has enjoyed getting to collaborate with coworkers who have complementary skills and experiment with things on which he is not necessarily an expert.
"Each team and individual is given an opportunity to seek problem spaces that could benefit Netflix beyond the expected project scopes. That's the fun part about Netflix because it allows you to think versus everywhere else is very clear cut on, this is the project, this is the goal," he says.
Adapting to Different Roles
Anish didn't start out looking to work in security; in fact, he took no security-related courses at CMU. At Apple, he began as a software developer and added responsibilities for protecting Apple's proprietary content, devices and user identities. His work meant that users could watch Apple TV on non-Apple devices.
And because he had also learned about chips while he was working at Qualcomm, he had solid end-to-end system knowledge by the time he got to Netflix and he felt confident doing system design and security assessments.
One of his first assignments at Netflix was related to password sharing, protecting Netflix's proprietary content and preventing hackers from tapping into Netflix's back end. He has also guarded Netflix Preview Club, an invite-only feature that asks users to give feedback on forthcoming shows and movies.
But the thing he's working on that could leave a legacy is generative artificial intelligence. As Netflix rolls out new products, it can be tough for security engineers to keep up, he explains, so he is looking for routine and repetitive steps at the beginning of the process that an AI assistant could streamline. It's another way his ability to adapt has come in handy.