“I really loved my lab classes, but in terms of where biology students go, which is either med school or research and academia, I found that my heart wasn't into that work,” she says. “I love ‘my heart is in the work’ — I always use that phrase now — and I thought that that was it.”
But all through her undergraduate education, Adriana never set aside her creativity. She continued singing in choruses, something she enjoyed since childhood and she was a member — and eventually president — of Soundbytes, one of CMU’s a cappella groups.
“Being in Soundbytes is really what made me,” she says. “I'd worked so much in blending — that's what really taught me to stand out and to solo. But specifically, all the support that I got from the Soundbytes team, it was amazing. I love them. I owe them a lot.”
Adriana returned to the Washington area after graduation and began working for one of her sisters, who owned several bars in the region. Among her sister’s connections was Greg Boehm, the New York City bar owner who founded the Miracle franchise of pop-up holiday bars.
“My sister said, ‘That idea is genius, and we want to do it next year.’” Adriana says. “So I came back and I helped with the decorations. I didn't super design that one, but I helped a little bit, and I really loved it.”
Her sister also asked her to manage that first Miracle pop-up in Washington, which gave Adriana a firsthand look at what the decorated space meant to customers.
“It just showed me that extension of the magic of Christmas and how people would bring their families, their friends, their loved ones, their office mates, whoever,” she says. “And this huge line formed every night because we went so crazy with the decorations — I mean, we really went over the top with this installation idea.”
That first year was the start of a learning process that Adriana is still refining. She had to keep the fire marshal happy. They couldn’t be so over the top that they would hinder the flow inside the space. And they had to be theft-proof.