Jamar Thrasher has been writing his entire life — as a middle and high school student, as a business reporter, as a graduate student and even as press secretary for the Pennsylvania state government.
He’s written for many different publications and platforms and has crafted compelling stories for a wide range of audiences.
The only problem? They were never the stories he wanted to tell.
So in 2023, Jamar decided to pivot his communications career to focus on becoming a novelist.
“I was in my office and I thought about all that I had been through and all that I had experienced,” Jamar, who’d been working as the press secretary and deputy communications director for environmental justice at the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, says. “I then thought, if I want to focus on creative writing, on that artistry specifically, then I have to push my writing beyond writing press releases.
“And then I got back to my roots as a fiction writer, when I was in high school. Back then, I dreamed of writing the great American novel.”
Believing his writing had become stiff, Jamar applied to attend an online creative writing course offered by the Shipman Agency and taught by Zain Khalid, a 5 Under 35 honoree by the National Book Foundation and the author of “Brother Alive.”
“He really taught me how to be a writer that's ready for publication,” Jamar says. It was in this workshop that he began writing his novel which he says is an experimental love story spiked heavily with magical realism.
With Zain’s encouragement, he applied for — and was accepted to — the 2024 class of Periplus Fellows . Periplus — a highly selective mentorship collective serving U.S. writers who are Black, Indigenous or people of color — pairs each fellow with a mentor who is an established fiction author.
Jamar’s mentor, Laura van den Berg , who was named America’s best young writer by Salon early in her career, met with him monthly to provide advice and support.
“We talked about industry politics, we talked about editing and revision,” Jamar says. “Laura helped me prioritize creating a discipline of writing consistently in order to complete a manuscript.”