A Career Focused on Fairness
In a career path that has spanned both government and tech, the through-line is fairness. Whether she is focused on economics or human rights, Breanna continues to work toward a better world.
As part of the Google team, Breanna brokered deals to build high-speed internet infrastructure in emerging markets. That experience — working with engineers, regulators and heads of state to achieve the goal — was both challenging and rewarding. Her work in Liberia, in particular, constitutes one of Breanna’s proudest professional accomplishments.
“USAID (the U.S. Agency for International Development) approached us with the idea that they wanted Google to do some digital reconstruction in West Africa,” Breanna says. Her team was able to create strategic relationships in Monrovia, Liberia, that enabled them to lay down fiber there.
“It felt great because we were providing more equitable access, but it wasn’t charity. It was a business collaboration, and it was successful,” Breanna says. President Biden recently cited their work with USAID as a model of effective public-private partnerships.
Breanna moved from Google to YouTube. As a strategic partnership manager at YouTube Social Impact, Breanna developed partnerships with non-governmental organizations like UNICEF, Doctors Without Borders and the Malala Fund to support human rights defenders.
“It was interesting and really fun work because it had social impact, but we made a difference in a way distinct from the work done through a foundation. We weren’t giving out grants or money,” Breanna says. “Instead, we were teaching people how to use technology to build community. We provided the tools and the platform, and we taught them how to become effective digital storytellers to tell their own stories.”
In partnership with the Malala Fund, Breanna worked on a campaign to support girls’ education in India. The effort involved collaboration with various public figures to help them craft messages, similar to short public service announcements, in their own style, on their own channels, in their own words.
Breanna’s commitment to fairness extends outside her professional roles. Since 2015, she has served on San Francisco’s Commission on the Status of Women (COSW); She was elected president in 2019.
“It’s one of the strongest and most innovative commissions in the country,” Breanna says.
COSW tackles a broad range of issues aincluding violence prevention, equality in the workplace, financial empowerment and representation on public decision-making bodies.
In 2021, Breanna became a senior director at Microsoft Cloud for Industry. Her proudest professional accomplishment came recently. Breanna received a thank you note from a member of her team who was leaving. The person thanked Breanna for creating a culture where the person could be their full self and feel like they belonged.
“That’s the type of culture I strive to create for everyone,” Breanna explained. “To have it be affirmed meant a lot.”