Tackling Big Problems
After graduation, Lauren moved to Texas where she worked as a test automation engineer at a startup and enrolled at the University of Texas at Austin to earn her master’s degree in mechanical engineering.
As a graduate student, she briefly interned for Shell. The company then offered her a full-time position, leading to an opportunity to work offshore on one of the company’s largest floating platforms, Appomattox, in the Gulf of Mexico. She continued to climb, becoming a project manager and, now, a business advisor to the vice president of information and digital engineering in Houston.
COVID-19 added challenges and barriers, but Lauren says she’s proud of herself and her team’s resilience throughout the pandemic. They delivered a multimillion-dollar project on time, on budget and on target “from our pajamas at home,” she jokes.
And she delivered a baby in the middle of it, too.
Her experience in the Department of Mechanical Engineering helped equip her for such challenges by exposing her to different people, projects and work ethics. At CMU, she found that she likes “big problems that challenge the world, that have major impact.”
“I worked my butt off in school,” Lauren says. “And knowing how difficult that can be, it helps to build up the mindset that when something’s not easy, you don’t just quit right away and give up. (If we did), we wouldn’t be tackling big problems, and we wouldn’t be changing things if as soon as you hit a roadblock, you quit.”
The College of Engineering also provided some of her favorite memories while at CMU — trips to Peru and China with educational and industry components. These were opportunities she never would have had if not for scholarships.
Education changed her life and motivates her philanthropy, and Lauren encourages other alumni to consider how they can change someone’s life, even with small donations.
“Every thousand dollars, every hundred dollars I got towards the scholarship completely changed my path.”