Seeding Project Baseplate
Lego has always been an informal way for kids to gather and create. Project Baseplate is an innovation lab and community hub out of the Center for Transformational Play that provides a formalized roadmap to use Lego to address social and emotional learning through play. Originally based on research from the UK showing positive impacts on neurodivergent children’s social skills, Project Baseplate’s core belief is that Lego helps all kids develop in the realm of emotional intelligence, improving teamwork, increasing confidence and making new friends.
This initiative captured interest from other CMU communities, too. The Entertainment Technology Center was pivotal in the initial launch of Project Baseplate, and provides ongoing support. Lindsay Foreman, the Simon Initiative’s K-12 coordinator, was one of the first educators trained under Project Baseplate and ran one of the earliest pilots at Pittsburgh Public Schools. Then, she passed the torch to students from The Gelfand Center, who continue to facilitate brick clubs around the Pittsburgh area.
“We’re all connecting the dots with each other, we’re not working in a vacuum,” Mimi says of the CMU collaboration. “As more students get involved, we see so many opportunities for brick clubs leading to even more community collaborations.”
The renewed funding commitment from the Conovers builds on the curriculum hosted by Matt’s Maker Space with training for teachers or after-school care providers to start brick clubs using proven techniques, and kits with the supplies necessary to do so. A network for support from funders, in addition to funds from the Conovers, boosts additional efforts, including research on the initiatives so good ideas can spread.
Over 100 educators have been trained, and they’re leading Project Baseplate brick clubs serving hundreds of students primarily in southwestern Pennsylvania, but beginning to spread as far as Michigan and Colorado. Emily Sanders, the training director for Matt’s Maker Space, coaches brick club leaders, and she sees firsthand how LEGO fosters significant growth in students she works with.
“Brick clubs offer a structured approach to learn through play. It’s easy to get why it’s fun, but the impact on social skills goes way beyond what even I initially expected,” Emily says. “We’re seeing kids developing as leaders and communicators. They’re making new friends and gaining confidence. Brick clubs also support neurodivergent learners, and offer a therapeutic approach for social skills that’s needed after the pandemic. These are all tools we didn’t have before, and now more kids can access them with every new brick club leader we’re able to train.”
Those little plastic bricks that captured Matt Conover’s imagination many years ago are now one more part of his legacy of innovation and creativity through play.
“The reason we wanted to fund Project Baseplate is I have seen it in action already,” Noelle says. “I see Lego kids in our spaces, and they are the ones I have a heart for. Lego helps kids feel they have something important to say, and Matt would have wanted to be a part of a brick club! We have 60  places to start these Lego clubs now, so we’ll be able to get the word out about this, launch it and help it proliferate from there.”