Game Time
A mechanical engineering graduate, Stan’s first season as an inside linebacker was in 2014. He finished his senior year as a four-year starter and a team captain; was awarded the Senior Leadership Recognition Award as well as the Jimmy Star Memorial Scholarship ; named Academic All-District and chosen for three All-Conference teams.
Luke joined the team as a running back in 2017 and worked toward his degree in business administration from Tepper School of Business . He was a team captain his senior year, named an Academic All-American and twice-over Academic All-District and chosen for the Presidents’ Athletic Conference Academic Honor Roll three times.
Continuing their fusion of athletics and academics, Stan Jr. and Luke were both named to the National Football Foundation & College Hall of Fame’s Hampshire Honor Society, which recognizes players who have maintained a 3.2 GPA throughout their higher education careers.
Both say Coach Lackner, who retired in 2021 after 36 years leading Tartan Football, evolved into “a father away from home.”
Like Stan and Paula, Coach Lackner and his staff strove to instill integrity and excellence, both in the classroom and on the field, in their student-athletes.
“The ultimate reason we were at Carnegie Mellon was for the academics, but our teammates and our coaches, they formed our experience,” Luke says. “CMU is 100% a challenge, so as student-athletes, we had the normal experience plus an entire sport on top of it. But we had our team to support us for the ups and downs, the long nights, the hard study sessions, the cold games, the injuries, whatever it may be, we were there for each other.”
Throughout the boys’ CMU careers, Paula and Stan made it to as many games as they could, as did Natalie, as she earned her bachelor’s degree in public health and a medical degree. She’s currently the pediatric chief resident at Prisma Health in Greenville.
“Natalie has always been so supportive of our family’s love of the game,” says Stan Jr., who recently married fellow Tartan student-athlete and Class of 2020 Dietrich College of Humanities and Social Sciences graduate Kathryn (Reilly) Bikulege. “Our family isn’t who it is without her.”
The brothers are still teammates, too, working together at Lightview Capital, a private equity firm in West Palm Beach, Florida.
“CMU really teaches you the core competencies to be successful,” Luke says. “I was able to learn how to work with so many different people and different ways of thinking that allow me to approach solutions uniquely.”