So Jorjeta found a role working on smart grid in a networking context at Itron, which specializes in smart meters and smart grid solutions. Knowing that she always wanted to return to academia, she then moved to Fujitsu Research, where she switched her focus to machine learning and artificial intelligence. At Fujitsu, Jorjeta won a number of awards, including being a top 10 finalist in the 2016 Fujitsu Next Generation Product Idea Contest for her project, "Robo Butler." The company flew Jorjeta to Japan to present to the CEO and board of directors of Fujitsu Global. Then, as a senior manager and AI distinguished research scientist at Accenture, Jorjeta led a team that built and deployed virtual assistants for companies like UPS.
After 16 years in industry, Jorjeta returned to academia as an assistant professor of computer engineering at San Jose State University, a career move she made to be in an environment where she could empower students.
"When I was in industry, I was working 16 hours a day," she says. "I didn't have the energy to do anything else. I feel like I can do more and be more impactful this way."
It's not surprising that Jorjeta spends her time at San Jose State working to provide opportunities for students in computer science and engineering, including those limited resource backgrounds. She recently became the principal investigator for a $2.5 million National Science Foundation S-STEM grant focused on creating summer and research programs that empower under-resourced students from 10th grade through their degree completion at San Jose State. Throughout her expansive career, Jorjeta has won two best paper awards, earned more than 40 patents and had her research cited more than 13,000 times.
But at the core of her work remains the desire to make computer science and related fields more accessible. She believes that reaching students early can help them establish the confidence to pursue opportunities they may not have considered otherwise.
"Empowering students with knowledge, a growth mindset and a sense of belonging in tech can create a foundation for success and resilience throughout their careers," she says.
Thanks to Jorjeta, many School of Computer Science students have gained that resilience. But as Women@SCS approaches its 25th anniversary, Jorjeta says she didn't consider the program's longevity when she helped create it.
"I was so concerned with how to fix things in that moment. I wasn't even thinking about how it might be sustained and for how long," she says. "We just created a small spark, and the results were amazing."