That opportunity arose five years later when another CMU connection gave Steve a call and asked him if he would like to work for IBM Consulting in Singapore.
“I knew nothing really about the details of working internally with IBM, especially on their consulting side,” he says. “And I knew nothing about Singapore. But we knew we wanted to go back to Asia.”
“We're thinking, ‘Maybe it's going to be something like our Japanese experience’ — a couple years, two or three years, something like that,” Pat says.
A couple years turned into 23. After a few years with IBM, Steve was asked to establish a school of information systems at the relatively new Singapore Management University. He was soon appointed as the school’s founding dean, starting an 18-year full-time stretch at the university, continuing as dean and then as vice provost for research.
Pat immersed herself in life in Singapore as well. After the December 2004 earthquake and tsunami that devastated much of the region, she was part of a 10-year volunteer effort to provide “pocket money” to school-aged children who were left as orphans following the disaster.
“Over those years, I made repeat visits to many schools in the area, meeting with school headmasters and visiting the students and their guardians,” she says. “We tracked the students through the years, and the project even had sufficient funds to provide support to some students when they went on to college.”
The imminent birth of their first grandchild drew Pat back to the United States in early 2023. Steve followed a few months later after wrapping up a special project with SMU. They now live in Connecticut, and Steve continues to serve as a consultant on applications of artificial intelligence.
And they continue to support Carnegie Mellon with annual donations and have included CMU in their estate.
“It's just our values to do this for an institution that’s meant so much to us,” Steve says.
“CMU really opened a lot of doors and opportunities to me,” Pat adds. “It just broadened my horizons greatly. So the network of people and the opportunities that I had through CMU has meant quite a lot to me.”