The Science of Sport
In his 50s, Frank flew sailplanes and ran 5Ks. In his 70s, he started his track and field career, following in the footsteps of his wife of 53 years, Kay. Frank’s latest event was the 2023 National Senior Games, an Olympic-style competition for athletes age 50 and older.
For the event, which took place in Pittsburgh in July, Frank qualified for the 400-meter and 800-meter races as well as the discus and hammer throw events.
“One of the physical principles that we’re very interested in both for discus and the hammer throw is called angular momentum,” he says.
Angular momentum is the property of any rotating object given by moment of inertia times angular velocity. Most discus throwers spin around prior to the point of release. The farther their hand is from their body, or the faster a thrower spins, then the more angular momentum is created.
“If you increase your hand distance from your body by 10% while you’re turning around, it’s the same as spinning 10% faster,” Frank says. “With the hammer, of course, you’ve got the same deal.”
Frank picked up the hammer in 2013 after watching competitors in the National Senior Games in Cleveland, Ohio. In 2015 and 2017, he placed third and earned bronze medals at nationals. In 2019, his throw of 90 feet, 5.05 inches earned him silver.
“There are other guys who are much bigger and stronger than Frank, but because he really appreciates the technique, that’s how he can get the distance,” says Kay of her husband’s achievements.
Now in his 80s, Frank is adding novelist to his list of accomplishments. His first book, “Laser Trap,” is a thriller that draws inspiration from his time as a graduate student, and a couple of characters are recognizable to a few of his Carnegie Mellon friends.
“The name of the chief character’s adviser is R.W. Kromer,” Frank says. “So as soon as Robert W. Kraemer (former head of Mellon College of Science’s Department of Physics) saw the book, he knew it was representing him. He got a big kick out of that.”