Energy Master's Degrees
EST&P is a professional engineering master’s program oriented towards career preparation of individuals who have a passion for leading society’s energy future. Each of the EST&P program's six energy master's degrees are interdisciplinary engineering programs that can be customized to align with your personal and professional goals. Regardless of the degree program, all EST&P graduates share core energy knowledge, delivered in our energy core courses that are the foundation of the EST&P program, and an engineering concentration , in which you select among pre-approved energy courses offered by one of the six College of Engineering departments that are partners with the EST&P program. Further customization is achieved through the many courses and curricular paths available, including a large range of individual energy-related courses and projects at CMU available as breadth electives , as well as four degree variants, including advanced study and applied study .
The two Foundational Energy Master's Degrees (M.S.) are:
The two Applied Study Energy Master's Degrees (M.S.) integrate professional development and an internship with one of the Foundational Energy Degrees:
The Energy Science, Technology and Policy - Applied Study (EST&P-APS) degree integrates professional development (3 units) and a summer internship (3 units) with the base EST&P degree. Two semesters of full-time study and a summer internship between those semesters are required for completion of 102 units of qualifying coursework. Only available for spring semester start.
The Energy Science, Technology and Policy - Applied Advanced Study (EST&P-AAS) degree integrates professional development (3 units) and a summer internship (3 units) with the EST&P-ADS degree. Three semesters of full-time study and a summer internship between two of those semesters are required for completion of 126 units of qualifying coursework.
The two Artificial Intelligence-Energy Science, Technology & Policy Master's Degrees (M.S.) are:
The Artificial Intelligence-Energy Science, Technology & Policy (MSAIE-EST&P) degree integrates the AI fundamentals with the base EST&P degree program. Three semesters of full-time study are required for completion of 120 units of qualifying coursework. Only available for fall semester start.
The Artificial Intelligence-Energy Science, Technology & Policy - Applied Study (MSAIE-EST&P-APS) degree integrates professional development (3 units) and a summer internship (3 units) with the MSAIE-EST&P degree. Three semesters of full-time study and a summer internship are required for completion of 126 units of qualifying coursework. Only available for fall semester start.