Table of Contents Quick Summary Ask the Chatbot a Question
By 1863 the war was taking a clear toll on the civilians of both sides. The Union had the Copperheads. Labour shortages and inflation also complicated life for Northerners, though on the whole the economy boomed in the North during the war. Whatever difficulties Yankees experienced paled in comparison with those of Southerners, who were plagued with shortages of food, salt, and nearly every conceivable consumer good . The shortages had myriad causes: the Union blockade shut off the import of many finished materials from Europe; naturally, the war itself shut down official trade with the North, which had supplied the South’s agrarian economy with much of its manufactured goods; and Southern industry was neither large nor well developed enough to meet demand. Deprivation was evident early in the war with the lack of such basic items as paper and ink. Civilians wrote letters on anything they could find, including sheets torn from old account books and wallpaper ripped from the walls. The Southern states, which boasted about 800 newspapers at the beginning of the war, had only 22 by the time it ended, according to a contemporary estimate.
But the most pressing problem for many civilians in the Confederacy was the threat of starvation. Many causes were at the root of food shortages: a drought in 1862 drove down food supplies; slaves who worked on farms and plantations were fleeing to Union lines; Federal troops were gaining control of more parts of the Confederacy; and, with the Confederate military having priority in terms of transportation, food earmarked for civilians went bad before it could be shipped from warehouses. When the government tried to rectify the situation by impressing food, farmers responded by hiding their crops and their livestock. Hyperinflation sent the price of food skyrocketing while the value of the Confederate dollar cratered. Food riots broke out in several cities, including Richmond . In that instance, in April 1863, Davis ordered the militia to open fire on several hundred women if they did not leave the area, which they grudgingly did.
Photography
Photography had existed for about 20 years before the war broke out, but technological developments in the late 1850s allowed for the mass production of images. More than a million tintypes , which were printed on metal, and ambrotypes, which were printed on glass, would be made during the war. Cartes de visite , a forerunner of sorts to trading cards, featured images of famous military and political figures and other celebrities, such as actors, as well as ordinary soldiers and civilians. But the most dramatic development in the field of photography was an exhibit Mathew Brady mounted in October 1862. Featuring pictures of the aftermath of Antietam, the show attracted huge crowds to Brady’s New York City studio, and lines wrapped around the block. Americans had never seen photographs of such carnage before. “Mr. Brady has done something to bring home to us the terrible reality and earnestness of war. If he has not brought bodies and laid them in our dooryards and along the streets, he has done something very like it,” The New York Times reported.