Egypt and Cyrenaica (June 1940–June 1941)
When Benito Mussolini took Italy into the war, the Italian forces in North and East Africa were overwhelmingly superior in numbers to the scanty British forces opposing them. Commanding the British was Gen. Archibald Wavell , who had been appointed to the newly created post of commander in chief for the Middle East in July 1939, when the first steps were taken to strengthen the forces guarding the Suez Canal. Barely 50,000 British troops faced a total of 500,000 Italian and Italian colonial troops. On the southerly fronts, the Italian forces in Eritrea and Ethiopia mustered more than 200,000 men. On the North African front a still larger force in Cyrenaica under Marshal Rodolfo Graziani faced the 36,000 British, New Zealand , and Indian troops guarding Egypt . The Western Desert , inside the Egyptian frontier, separated the two sides on that front. The foremost British position was at Mersa Matruh ( Marsā Maṭrūḥ ), roughly 120 miles (190 km) inside the frontier and about 200 miles (320 km) west of the Nile River delta. Instead of remaining passive, Wavell used part of his one incomplete armored division as an offensive covering force, keeping up a continual series of raids over the frontier to harass the Italian posts.
It was not until September 13, 1940, that the Italians, after massing more than six divisions, began a cautious move forward into the Western Desert. After advancing 50 miles (80 km), less than halfway toward Mersa Matruh, they established a chain of fortified camps at Sīdī Barrānī that ultimately proved to be too widely separated to support one another. Weeks then passed without any attempt to move on. Meanwhile, further reinforcements reached Wavell, including three armored regiments rushed from England. Though still at a significant numerical disadvantage, Wavell chose to seize the initiative with an operation that was planned not as a sustained offensive but rather as a large-scale raid. It nevertheless led to the destruction of Graziani’s forces and the near collapse of the Italians’ hold on North Africa.
The strike force, under Maj. Gen. Richard Nugent O’Connor , consisted of only 30,000 men, against an opposing force of 80,000, but it had 275 tanks against 120 Italian tanks. The British tank force included 50 heavily armored Matilda IIs of the 7th Royal Tank Regiment, which proved impervious to most of the enemy’s antitank weapons . O’Connor was also supported by the Long Range Desert Group, a lightly armed reconnaissance unit whose activities behind enemy lines would provide valuable intelligence for the Allies throughout the North Africa campaigns. O’Connor’s force moved out on December 7, 1940, passing through a gap in the enemy’s chain of camps the following night. On December 9 the Italian garrisons at Nibeiwa, Tummar West, and Tummar East were taken, and thousands of prisoners were captured, whereas the attackers suffered very light casualties . The 7th Armoured Division , whose accomplishments in North Africa would earn its men the nickname “the Desert Rats,” drove west and reached the coast road, thus blocking the Italian line of retreat. On December 10 the 4th Indian Division moved north against the cluster of Italian camps around Sīdī Barrānī. After being checked initially, a converging assault from both flanks—with two additional tank regiments sent back by the 7th Armoured Division—was launched in the afternoon, and the greater part of the Sīdī Barrānī position was overrun before the day ended. The reserve brigade of the 7th Armoured Division was then brought up for a further enveloping attack to the west: it reached the coast beyond Buqbuq, intercepting a large column of retreating Italians. Over three days, the British had captured nearly 40,000 prisoners and 400 guns.
Britannica Quiz
Pop Quiz: 17 Things to Know About World War II
The remnants of the Italian forces took refuge in the coastal fortress of Bardia (Bardīyah), where they were promptly encircled by the 7th Armoured Division. The British lacked the infantry necessary to capitalize on the Italians’ demoralization, however, and three weeks elapsed before the 6th Australian Division arrived from Palestine to aid with the British advance. On January 3, 1941, the assault on Bardia was launched, with 22 Matilda II tanks leading the way. The Italian defense quickly collapsed, and by the third day the whole garrison had surrendered , with 45,000 prisoners, 462 artillery pieces, and 129 tanks falling into British hands. The 7th Armoured Division then drove westward to isolate Tobruk until the Australians could mount an assault on that coastal fortress. Tobruk was attacked on January 21 and fell next day, yielding 30,000 prisoners, 236 artillery pieces, and 37 tanks.
All that remained to complete the conquest of Cyrenaica was the capture of Benghazi , but on February 3, 1941, air reconnaissance revealed that the Italians were preparing to abandon the city. O’Connor therefore dispatched the 7th Armoured Division with the aim of heading off the Italian retreat. By the afternoon of February 5, a blocking position had been established south of Beda Fomm (Bayḍāʾ Fumm), across the enemy’s two routes of retreat. After capturing the surprised advance units of the Italian column, the British engaged the main Italian force on February 6. Although the Italians boasted 100 cruiser tanks and the British could field fewer than one-third of that number, British tank commanders utilized the terrain far more skillfully. When night fell, 60 of the Italian tanks had been crippled, and the remaining 40 were found abandoned the following day; only 3 of the British tanks had been knocked out. The Italian infantry and other troops surrendered in crowds when their protecting armor was destroyed. The British force of 3,000 men took 20,000 prisoners along with 216 artillery pieces and 120 tanks.
The complete extinction of Graziani’s army had left the British with a clear passage to Tripoli , but their drive was stopped by British Prime Minister Winston Churchill , who redeployed a significant portion of the North African force in an ultimately disastrous effort to oppose German ambitions in Greece. Thus, the opportunity for a speedy resolution in the North African theater was lost. The depleted British force would soon find itself facing one of the most-heralded commanders in the entire war. On February 6, 1941, the very day that Graziani’s army was being wiped out at Beda Fomm, Gen. Erwin Rommel was ordered to take command of a small German mechanized force that was to be sent to the Italians’ rescue. It would consist of two under-strength divisions, the 5th Light and the 15th Panzer, but the transportation of the first unit could not be completed until mid-April, and the second would not be in place until the end of May. When the British did not continue their advance, Rommel, having arrived early in Tripolitania , attempted an offensive with what forces he had. His initial aim was merely to occupy the bottleneck along the coastal road at Agheila (al-ʿUqaylah), but in that he succeeded so easily—entering Agheila on March 24 and taking Mersa Bréga (Qașr al-Burayqah) on March 31—that he endeavored to push on.
Disregarding orders to hold his position until the end of May, Rommel resumed his advance on April 2 with 50 tanks, followed up more slowly by two new Italian divisions. British forces hastily fell back in confusion and on April 3 evacuated Benghazi. O’Connor was sent to advise the local commander, but his unescorted staff car ran into a German advance group on the night of April 6, and he was taken prisoner. By April 11 the British had been swept out of Cyrenaica and over the Egyptian frontier. The sole exception was the garrison of Tobruk (dominated by the 9th Australian Division), which succeeded in repelling Rommel’s successive efforts to storm that fortress . By the time Rommel had reached the eastern frontier of Cyrenaica, however, he had overstretched his supply lines and was compelled to halt. After a tentative effort to relieve Tobruk in mid-May 1941, Wavell made a greater one in mid-June, with fresh reinforcements. Rommel countered the offensive with a well-gauged armored thrust against its flank. Churchill’s disappointment and dissatisfaction were shown in his removal of Wavell to India . The former commander in chief in India, Gen. Sir Claude Auchinleck , then succeeded Wavell as commander in the Middle East.