While Churchill was still chafing in London about his generals’ delay in resuming the offensive in Egypt , Montgomery waited for seven weeks after ʿAlam al-Halfaʾ in order to be sure of success. He finally chose to begin his attack in the night of October 23–24, 1942, when there would be moonlight for the clearing of gaps in the German minefields.
By mid-October the British 8th Army had 230,000 men and 1,230 gun-armed tanks ready for action, while the German–Italian forces numbered only 80,000 men, with only 210 tanks of comparable quality ready; and in air support the British enjoyed a superiority of 1,500 to 350. Allied air and submarine attacks on the Axis supply lines across the Mediterranean, moreover, had prevented Rommel’s army from receiving adequate replenishments of fuel, ammunition , and food; and Rommel himself, who had been ill before ʿAlam al-Halfaʾ, was convalescing in Austria .
The British launched their infantry attack at el-Alamein at 10:00 pm on October 23, 1942, but found the German minefields harder to clear than they had foreseen. Two days later, however, some of those tanks were deploying six miles beyond the original front. When Rommel, ordered back to Africa by Hitler , reached the front in the evening of October 25, half of the Germans’ available armour was already destroyed. Nevertheless, the impetus of the British onslaught was stopped the next day, when German antitank guns took a heavy toll of armour trying to deepen the westward penetration. In the night of October 28 Montgomery turned the offensive northward from the wedge, but this drive likewise miscarried. In the first week of their offensive the British lost four times as many tanks as the Germans but still had 800 available against the latter’s remaining 90.
When Montgomery switched the British line of attack back to its original direction, early on November 2, 1942, Rommel was no longer strong enough to withstand him. After expensive resistance throughout the daytime, he ordered a retreat to Fūka (Fūkah); but in the afternoon of November 3 the retreat was fatally countermanded by Hitler, who insisted that the Alamein position be held. The 36 hours wasted in obeying this long-distance instruction cost Rommel his chance of making a stand at Fūka: when he resumed his retreat, he had to race much farther back to escape successive British attempts to intercept him on the coast road by scythelike sweeps from the south. A fortnight after resuming his withdrawal from el-Alamein, Rommel was 700 miles to the west, at the traditional backstop of Agheila. As the British took their time to mount their attacks, he fell back farther by stages: after three weeks, 200 miles to Buerat (al-Buʾayrāt); after three more weeks, in mid-January 1943, the whole distance of 350 miles past Tripoli to the Mareth Line within the frontiers of Tunisia . By that time the Axis position in Tunisia was being battered from the west, through the execution of “Torch.”