Día de los Muertos | Cultural Celebration
October 23 - Nov 2, 2025
Día de los Muertos Kick-Off Lunch
October 23 | 12 pm Kara Family Lobby at the Greer Cabaret
Join us for a vibrant celebration of Mexican cuisine as we kick off our celebration of Día de los Muertos, featuring Los Gallitos’ food truck! Savor authentic tacos, tamales, and more as you immerse yourself in the lively atmosphere, complete with music by DJ Mateo Mattos.
Meet the ofrenda artists who will lead us in a sugar skull painting activity and at 1 pm will give an artist talk in the Greer lobby discussing the significance of this observance and the altar they designed and built.
12 - 1:30 pm - Lunch & DJ performance & Sugar Skull Painting
1 - 1:30 pm - Ofrenda Visit & Artist Talk
Interactive Ofrenda Experience
October 23 - November 2 Kara Family Lobby at the Greer Cabaret
Participate in our interactive ofrenda, where attendees can contribute personal mementos and flowers to the altar. Honor a loved one by adding to the ofrenda. You can leave a photo, a flower, or a written memory. Each contribution helps keep their spirit alive in our celebration of life and remembrance.
Ofrenda Networking Happy Hour
October 29 | 5:30 pm - 9 pm The Lounge at the Greer Cabaret Theater
Join us for a lively happy hour event in celebration of Día de Los Muertos! Contribute to the community ofrenda, enjoy a nacho/taco bar and sip on signature cocktails inspired by Mexican and Latin flavors while enjoying a vibrant atmosphere with DJ Mateo Mattos spinning tunes to keep the energy high! Gather with friends and family, share stories, and toast to life, memory, and connection in a festive and uplifting setting.
In partnership with the Pittsburgh Metropolitan Area Hispanic Chamber of Commerce and other community partners.
Please note: This is a ticketed event.
Coco Film Screening
November 1 | 1 pm Harris Theater
Despite his family's generations-old ban on music, young Miguel dreams of becoming an accomplished musician like his idol Ernesto de la Cruz. Desperate to prove his talent, Miguel finds himself in the stunning and colorful Land of the Dead. After meeting a charming trickster named Héctor, the two new friends embark on an extraordinary journey to unlock the real story behind Miguel's family history.
Ticket Info
$13 for adults | $10 for students | Free for 12 and under
Thank you to our sponsors