The contemporary course of events in the Balkans , described above, nullified the first great victory won by British land forces in World War II, which took place in North Africa . When Italy declared war against Great Britain in June 1940, it had nearly 300,000 men under Marshal Rodolfo Graziani in Cyrenaica (present-day Libya ), to confront the 36,000 troops whom the British commander in chief in the Middle East , General Sir Archibald Wavell , had in Egypt to protect the North African approaches to the Suez Canal . Between these forces lay the Western Desert , in which the westernmost position actually held by the British was Mersa Matruh ( Marsā Maṭİūḥ ), 120 miles east of the Cyrenaican frontier. The Italians in September 1940 occupied Sīdī Barrānī, 170 miles west of Mersa Matruh; but, after settling six divisions into a chain of widely separated camps, they did nothing more for weeks, and during that time Wavell received some reinforcements .
Wavell, whose command included not only Egypt but also the East African fronts against the Italians, decided to strike first in North Africa . On December 7, 1940, some 30,000 men, under Major General Richard Nugent O’Connor , advanced westward, from Mersa Matruh, against 80,000 Italians; but, whereas the Italians at Sīdī Barrānī had only 120 tanks, O’Connor had 275. Having passed by night through a gap in the chain of forts, O’Connor’s forces stormed three of the Italian camps, while the 7th Armoured Division was already cutting the Italians’ road of retreat along the coast to the west. On December 10 most of the positions closer to Sīdī Barrānī were overrun; and on December 11 the reserve tanks made a further enveloping bound to the coast beyond Buqbuq, intercepting a large column of retreating Italians. In three days the British had taken nearly 40,000 prisoners.
Falling back across the frontier into Cyrenaica, the remnant of the Italian forces from Sīdī Barrānī shut itself up in the fortress of Bardia (Bardīyah), which O’Connor’s tanks speedily isolated. On January 3, 1941, the British assault on Bardia began, and three days later the whole garrison of Bardia surrendered—45,000 men. The next fortress to the west, Tobruk (Ṭubruq), was assaulted on January 23 and captured the next day (30,000 more prisoners).
To complete their conquest of Cyrenaica, it remained for the British to take the port of Benghazi . On February 3, 1941, however, O’Connor learned that the Italians were about to abandon Benghazi and to retreat westward down the coast road to Agheila (al-ʿUqaylah). Thereupon he boldly ordered the 7th Armoured Division to cross the desert hinterland and intercept the Italian retreat by cutting the coast road well to the east of Agheila. On February 5, after an advance of 170 miles in 33 hours, the British were blocking the Italians’ line of retreat south of Beda Fomm (Bayḍāʾ Fumm); and in the morning of February 6, as the main Italian columns appeared, a day of battle began. Though the Italians had, altogether, nearly four times as many cruiser tanks as the British, by the following morning 60 Italian tanks had been crippled, 40 more abandoned, and the rest of Graziani’s army was surrendering in crowds. The British, only 3,000 strong and having lost only three of their 29 tanks, took 20,000 prisoners , 120 tanks, and 216 guns.
The British, having occupied Benghazi on February 6 and Agheila on February 8, could now have pushed on without hindrance to Tripoli , but the chance was foregone: the Greek government had accepted Churchill ’s reiterated offer of British troops to be sent to Greece from Egypt, which meant a serious reduction of British strength in North Africa.
The reduction was to have serious consequences, because on February 6, the very day of Beda Fomm, a young general, Erwin Rommel , had been appointed by Hitler to command two German mechanized divisions that were to be sent as soon as possible to help the Italians. Arriving in Tripolitania , Rommel decided to try an offensive with what forces he had. Against the depleted British strength, he was rapidly and brilliantly successful. After occupying Agheila with ease on March 24 and Mersa Bréga (Qasr al-Burayqah) on March 31, he resumed his advance on April 2—despite orders to stand still for two months—with 50 tanks backed by two new Italian divisions. The British evacuated Benghazi the next day and began a precipitate retreat into Egypt, losing great numbers of their tanks on the way (a large force of armour, surrounded at Mechili, had to surrender on April 7). By April 11 all Cyrenaica except Tobruk had been reconquered by Rommel’s audacious initiative .
Tobruk, garrisoned mainly by the 9th Australian Division, held out against siege; and Rommel, though he defeated two British attempts to relieve the place (May and June 1941), was obliged to suspend his offensive on the Egyptian frontier, since he had overstretched his supply lines.