Museum Guidelines for Self-Guided Student Groups
The Frick Pittsburgh
Please share the following museum guidelines with both students and chaperones before visiting
the Frick. These rules set general expectations for behavior, and are meant to help everyone get
the most out of their visit!
Any group that has not booked a guided field trip is welcome to explore our site on their own,
but may be subject to time and capacity limits.
General Policies
 While pencils are allowed in our museum spaces, we ask that visitors do not bring any
other writing utensils (pens, markers, colored pencils, etc) into any of the museums.
 Please maintain a safe distance from artworks and artifacts. The galleries can get
crowded, so be mindful of clothing, purses, and bodies as you move through the spaces.
 To protect our collections, large backpacks and bags are not allowed in museum spaces.
They should be left at school or on the bus. If you need to store a bag on site, please ask
a gallery attendant or museum experience associate for assistance.
 Food, drinks, and gum are not allowed in any of the museum spaces. Please be sure to
discard these in the trash container near the entrance to the site, or leave them on the
bus.
 Priority is given to tours and programs led by the Frick’s tour facilitators, museum
educators, and other staff members. Please be mindful of guided tours in the museums
and share the space accordingly.
 Please be considerate of other visitors and groups while enjoying the Frick! We ask that
all visitors use respectful language, indoor voices, and walk, not run. Please do not
prevent others from moving through the galleries by blocking walkways and doorways, or
exhibition displays by sitting in front of them for an extended period of time.
 Museum Educators often place boxes marked as “Frick Educator Materials” in the
galleries to use on guided student tours. Please leave these boxes, along with their
contents, where they are to avoid disrupting another group’s experience.
 To ensure that you have the best self-guided experience, please notify the Frick of your
plan to visit by emailing Education@TheFrickPittsburgh.org with the date, number of
students, and time of your planned visit.
Arrival
 Our parking lot is handicap accessible, free to use, and can accommodate cars and small
vans. However, the parking lot cannot accommodate buses, even to turn around.
 While we cannot reserve bus parking for self-guided groups, buses must utilize street
parking on Reynolds St., South Homewood or South Lexington Ave. We ask that self-
guided group buses do not park at the base of the steps to The Frick Art Museum on
Reynolds Street, as that space is reserved for guided groups. That space is clearly marked
with an orange “reserved parking” sign.
 A map of our site and its surrounding streets is attached for your reference.
The Frick Art Museum
 While access to The Frick Art Museum’s permanent collection is free, the museum also
regularly hosts visiting exhibitions that sometimes require paid admission. Check out the
exhibitions page on our website for up-to-date information about exhibitions currently
on view, ticketing, and more.
 Non-flash photography is welcome in The Frick Art Museum.
 Information about group sketching options can be provided upon request by
education@TheFrickPittsburgh.org.
 While the galleries invite conversation, they are not large enough to accommodate
groups larger than 10 for discussions or activities. The use of the auditorium may be
available for this purpose, but priority is given to tours and programs guided by Frick staff
members. Please inquire about auditorium availability with a Frick staff member upon
arrival.
 The Frick Art Museum is fully wheelchair accessible.
 If you have questions about museum policies during your visit to The Frick Art Museum,
please consult a gallery attendant or museum experience associate at the Grable Visitor
Center.
The Car and Carriage Museum
 Explore the history of transportation in The Car and Carriage Museum, which is free and
self-guided! Those with young visitors are encouraged to check out the new children’s
play area.
 Snap a photo sitting inside our touchable car! Non-flash photography is permitted in the
Car and Carriage Museum.
 If you have questions about the museum policies during your visit, please consult the
gallery attendant on duty.
Clayton
 Learn about Pittsburgh’s Gilded Age by registering for a guided tour of Clayton! Tours are
available to all members of the public but do have limited capacity.
 Public tours of Clayton cannot accommodate large groups due to space limitations in the
mansion. If you are interested in touring Clayton with your students, please contact 412-
342-4087 or Education@TheFrickPittsburgh.org for information.
The Greenhouse and Grounds
 Have fun exploring the beautiful plants in the Greenhouse! Many of these plants are
delicate, so please do not touch, move, or damage plants or their containers.
 Access to the grounds and greenhouse is free during business hours.
 Certain areas of the grounds are restricted and marked with “staff only” signs. Please do
not enter these areas.
Lunch
 If you would like to coordinate pre-packed boxed lunches with The Frick’s café, please
contact Education@TheFrickPittsburgh.org at least four weeks before your visit.
 While visitors are encouraged to eat at The Frick’s Café, it does have limited seating and
serves visitors on a first-come, first-serve basis. Please be prepared for large orders for
many individuals to require a long waiting period.
 Outdoor seating is available for those who bring picnic blankets and are willing to sit in
the grass! Private indoor seating is available for a fee; please contact
Education@TheFrickPittsburgh.org for more information.
In Case of Emergency
 In the event of an emergency, please notify any Frick staff member immediately.