Vendor, Performer & Sponsor Opportunities
The Pittsburgh Downtown Partnership (PDP) provides many opportunities for local vendors and performers to get involved and showcase their offerings to our diverse Downtown community.
Vendor and Performers
If you’re interested in becoming a vendor at one of our events (see descriptions below) and would like to learn more before applying, please complete our Vendor Interest Form .
If you’re interested in general performer opportunities, complete our Performer Interest Form
Sponsors & Exhibitors
If you’re interested in sponsoring or exhibiting at one of our events, please fill out our Sponsor Interest Form
Burgh Bazaar
Burgh Bazaar bring an awesome outdoor pop-up shopping market and festival to Downtown, featuring Pittsburgh’s most creative independent vendors. Clothing, furniture, candles, food, drinks, and more are exhibited in this series.
Upcoming Dates / Times
September 20: 12:00pm – 5:00pm October 25: 12:00pm – 5:00pm
Highmark Light Up Night®
The 64th Annual Highmark Light Up Night® celebration will be held in Downtown Pittsburgh on Saturday, November 22, 2025.
Peoples Gas Holiday Market™
The Peoples Gas Holiday Market has established itself as one of the region’s premiere holiday destinations and continues to build momentum.
Holiday Market visitors experience a wonderland of Alpine-style wooden chalets as they stroll through the illuminated square, each chalet brimming with unique holiday gifts.
Farmers Market
May 15 – September 25, 2025
The Farmers Market will operate every Thursday from 10:00 a.m. – 2:00 p.m. in PPG Place Plaza, May 15 through September 25, 2025. The Market is seeking a wide variety of local purveyors throughout the season to bring the vibrant colors and tastes of the farm to Downtown!
Application is Closed
Full-time vendors: please apply by March 28th, 2025. Part-time vendor applications will be accepted on a rolling basis throughout the season.
Download the Vendor Fact Sheet to learn more.
Yoga in PPG Place Plaza
May 11 – September 30, 2025
Pittsburgh’s favorite free yoga series brings some of the city’s best instructors to Downtown for free,  weekly classes throughout the spring and summer months. Yoga classes will begin on May 11th and take place on Sunday mornings from 10 – 11 a.m. and Tuesday evenings from 5:30 – 6:30 p.m through the end of September.
Application is Closed
Please apply by March 28th, 2025. Applicants must show proof of certification.
Picklesburgh
July 11 – July 13, 2025
Picklesburgh represents one of the most attended events of the year in Downtown Pittsburgh with crowds expected to surpass 200K people.
Special Insurance Offer for PDP Vendors
For your general & product liability insurance needs, Insurance Canopy offers programs specifically designed for different types of vendors. Learn more about Artist, Crafters, and Tradesmen (ACT) Insurance AND Food Liability Insurance Program (FLIP) here . The PDP does not endorse any insurance company; many of our vendors, however, find these programs to be a cost-effective option. Use code PDP10 for $10 off when purchasing an ACT, FLIP, or other Product Liability Insurance policy.
If you have questions or would like further information on becoming a vendor at our events please contact: Lynn Morrissey , Senior Director of Special Events , Pittsburgh Downtown Partnership