Services & Resources
We're here to make your campus house your home. Let us take care of the daily needs so you can concentrate on being a student and taking full advantage of your Carnegie Mellon experience. If you have any questions about CMU-provided services, email Housing Services or call 412-268-2139.
Maintenance Requests
Emergency Maintenance Requests
In case of a breakdown of an essential service (plumbing, lighting, heating, lock, etc.) or a problem that threatens health and safety, report the problem quickly. Emergencies will be addressed immediately. Less severe maintenance problems may be resolved within 24 hours.
For emergency maintenance during Housing Services office hours (Monday - Friday, 8:30 am - 5:00 pm), call 412-268-2139.
When the office is closed (after 5:00pm Monday - Friday and all day Saturday and Sunday), call the Service Response Center at 412-268-2910.
Non-Emergency Maintenance Requests
Submit all non-emergency requests for maintenance in the residence halls (including furniture requests) via the online Housing and Dining Portal . Login and click the "Maintenance" link on the menu bar. (Only students who are checked into their room will be able to submit a maintenance request.) Be detailed in your request. The target time frame for non-emergency requests is seven working days.
For Staff maintenance requests, or requests by students for a location outside of their living space, use this request form instead.
If you encounter difficulties with a wired or wireless connection, complete and submit the Wired/Wireless Problem Report .
Submit a Non-Emergency Maintenance Request
How to Submit a Maintenance Request
VIDEO
Laundry
Your campus laundry rooms are equipped with high-efficiency (HE) washing machines. They hold more clothes and use less water than conventional laundry equipment which will save you time and energy. For best results, use high-efficiency detergent. Always follow the manufacturer’s directions on the detergent bottle label. Pre-measured HE liquid packets are also recommended and are quite convenient.
Washing Instructions 1. Load clothes loosely and lose the door secure . 2. Open Dispenser and add 1/4 cup high efficiency liquid detergent. Power Detergent or Pods are put in wash tub with clothing. 3. Select desired cycle and push the Start button. 4. Please wait until door unlocks within 60 seconds after cycle completes.
Washing Instructions
1. Load clothes loosely and lose the door secure . 2. Open Dispenser and add 1/4 cup high efficiency liquid detergent. Power Detergent or Pods are put in wash tub with clothing. 3. Select desired cycle and push the Start button. 4. Please wait until door unlocks within 60 seconds after cycle completes.
Drying Instructions 1. Clean the lint filter. 2. Load clothing loosely and close the door securely. 3. Select desired cycle. 4. Push the Start button.
Drying Instructions
1. Clean the lint filter. 2. Load clothing loosely and close the door securely. 3. Select desired cycle. 4. Push the Start button.
Do you see an Error Code?
Error code: UE
Meaning: Weight of clothing is not distributed evenly. To correct:
Open the machine door.
Open the machine door.
Redestribute clothing.
Redestribute clothing.
Close the door and hit restart.
Close the door and hit restart.
Error code: SUDS
Meaning: Too much soap Machine will run additional rinse cycle (seven minutes) to remove suds. To prevent: Use less soap (1/4 cup maximum)
Error code: DE 1
Meaning: Door is not fully closed. To correct:
Open the machine door.
Open the machine door.
Reclose the door tightly.
Reclose the door tightly.
How to make a Washer/Dryer Service Request
You have three options to make a service request:
Download "Fowler Service App"
Email servicerequests@fowlercompanies.com
Call 908-686-3400 Ext. 2
IMPORTANT: For all of the service request options, please include the following information:
Machine ID number
The issue with the machine.
Error code if one is displayed.
Utilities
Internet
Wireless network access is available in on-campus residential buildings. Using the wireless connection is recommended to reduce overall university energy consumption. Ethernet (hard-wired) jacks are available in most on-campus units. Wired ports are turned off by default. If you need to use a wired connection, visit How to Connect to the Wired Network for more details. The Residence on Fifth , Fairfax Apartments , and Neville Apartments are completely wireless environments.
Cable
Residences located on campus include cable TV service in all student rooms. You will need to bring a cable-ready digital TV and a coaxial cable to connect.
Water, Sewage, Heat & Electricity
These utilities are among the services covered by the housing rates and are supplied to all university housing.
Air Conditioning
Some residences are air conditioned. If students need air conditioning in a residence without air conditioning for medical reason, please read the air conditioning section of the Housing policies.
Space Reservations
The below spaces are available to students, staff, and faculty for use during the academic year. Reservations for these locations are honored on a first-come, first-served basis. Please email Residential Education with any inquiries.
Morewood Gardens Multipurpose Room
The Morewood Gardens Multipurpose room has a wooden floor, barre, and mirrored wall. It can be used for dance practice.
University departments and student organizations can request a reservation by contacting the Office of Residential Education at least 48 hours in advance of the requested reservation time. Reservations are scheduled on a first-come, first-served basis and can be made for a one-time use or recurring use during the semester. Reservations are accepted for the current semester beginning at 8:30 am on the first day of classes. All reservations are canceled at the end of each semester. Your reservation is set until you receive a confirmation email from the Office of Residential Education.
If you are not a Morewood Corridor resident (Morewood E-Tower, Morewood Gardens, Mudge House, Stever House, and the Greek Quad), you will need to request access to the Morewood Gardens front door in order to gain entry to the multi-purpose room. Those requests should be sent to housing@andrew.cmu.edu and resed@andrew.cmu.edu at least 48 hours (two business days) in advance of the reservation. If you will be holding an event and you are unsure of the attendee list, please identify a group leader to be given access who will be responsible for meeting the group in advance of entering the building.
Demand for using this space is high, so to accommodate as many requests as possible, students and organizations are limited to a maximum of two hours per day and a maximum of six hours per week . Please vacate the multipurpose room at least five minutes prior to the end of your reservation so the next group may begin using the space promptly at their reserved time.
West Wing Tech Lounge
The West Wing Tech Lounge is a meeting room that can accommodate up to 20 people.
University departments and student organizations can request a reservation by contacting the Office of Residential Education at least 48 hours in advance of the requested reservation time. Reservations are scheduled on a first-come, first-served basis and can be made for a one-time use or recurring use during the semester. Reservations are available each year from early August through mid-May. All reservations are canceled at the end of each semester. Your reservation is not set until you receive a confirmation email from the Office of Residential Education.
Please notify Residential Education in advance of all cancellations. We expect that you will leave the room clean and remove all items that you bring into the space.
Resident Communication
The Office of Residential Education is the hub for sharing information with students who live in our residence halls. If you are hosting a campus event and thinking about how to include residents in your program, we are glad to assist.
Weekly Announcement Emails
Each Monday afternoon, during the fall and spring semesters, a weekly announcement e-mail is sent to all students living in our residential communities. This email message is sent to Residential Education staff (Resident Assistants) who forwards it to their residents. The Announcement e-mail contains information about upcoming events sponsored by Carnegie Mellon recognized groups, organizations, departments or campus communities.
To have an upcoming event included in the weekly announcement, please send an e-mail with detailed information, an image, and a short blurb by 5 p.m. on Friday. Information received after the deadline will be included in the following week's message, if applicable.
To subscribe or unsubscribe from the announcement e-mail list, please send an email with your name and contact information.
Posters
The Office of Residential Education distributes posters to residential staff members for posting in campus residence halls. Posting is limited to Carnegie Mellon University recognized student organizations and University departments/programs only. We do not distribute materials for external sources or businesses. A ll posters must be approved for distribution by the Office of Residential Education.
Posters can be submitted for in-person approval at the Student Life Suite or by emailing the SLS office administrator. To ensure timely distribution, please secure approval and deliver posters to the Student Life Suite at least one week in advance of your promotion.