Employer Rewards and Recognition
The Office of Human Resources is committed to making Carnegie Mellon University a great place to work, and we are honored to have received awards and recognition for our employee benefit programs and support services. Read on to learn more about the recognition Carnegie Mellon has received as an employer.
Best Employer for Diversity Forbes ranked Carnegie Mellon University one of the best employers for diversity in 2024. CMU was recommended as an excellent employer across a range of diversity-related topics, based on an independent survey of over 170,000 U.S. employees from all industry sectors working for companies employing at least 1,000 people within the U.S. This prestigious accolade is a testament to CMU's commitment to fostering a positive and inclusive workplace culture.
Best Employer for Diversity
Forbes ranked Carnegie Mellon University one of the best employers for diversity in 2024. CMU was recommended as an excellent employer across a range of diversity-related topics, based on an independent survey of over 170,000 U.S. employees from all industry sectors working for companies employing at least 1,000 people within the U.S. This prestigious accolade is a testament to CMU's commitment to fostering a positive and inclusive workplace culture.
Military Friendly® School Award Military Friendly® is the standard that measures an organization’s commitment, effort and success in creating sustainable and meaningful benefit for the military community. CMU has been recognized as a Top 10 Military Friendly® School in the Tier 1 Research Institution category, and has also been designated as a Military Spouse Friendly® School.
Military Friendly® School Award
Military Friendly® is the standard that measures an organization’s commitment, effort and success in creating sustainable and meaningful benefit for the military community. CMU has been recognized as a Top 10 Military Friendly® School in the Tier 1 Research Institution category, and has also been designated as a Military Spouse Friendly® School.
America's Best-In-State Employer Forbes annually ranks Carnegie Mellon University one of the best employers in Pennsylvania . The list is compiled by anonymously surveying 80,000 Americans working for businesses with at least 500 employees to pinpoint the organizations liked best by employees. Respondents are asked to anonymously rate their employers on a variety of criteria as well as indicate how likely they’d be to recommend their employer to others.
America's Best-In-State Employer
Forbes annually ranks Carnegie Mellon University one of the best employers in Pennsylvania . The list is compiled by anonymously surveying 80,000 Americans working for businesses with at least 500 employees to pinpoint the organizations liked best by employees. Respondents are asked to anonymously rate their employers on a variety of criteria as well as indicate how likely they’d be to recommend their employer to others.
Breastfeeding Friendly Place Award Carnegie Mellon University was recognized as a 2024 Breastfeeding Friendly Place by the Allegheny County Health Department's Women, Infants and Children (WIC) program. This award recognizes workplaces and public spaces that “make an extra effort to accommodate breastfeeding mothers.”
Breastfeeding Friendly Place Award
Carnegie Mellon University was recognized as a 2024 Breastfeeding Friendly Place by the Allegheny County Health Department's Women, Infants and Children (WIC) program. This award recognizes workplaces and public spaces that “make an extra effort to accommodate breastfeeding mothers.”
Higher Education Excellence in Diversity Award Carnegie Mellon University received t he INSIGHT Into Diversity Higher Education Excellence in Diversity (HEED) Award in 2023, which recognizes colleges and universities that demonstrate an outstanding commitment to diversity and inclusion.
Higher Education Excellence in Diversity Award
Carnegie Mellon University received t he INSIGHT Into Diversity Higher Education Excellence in Diversity (HEED) Award in 2023, which recognizes colleges and universities that demonstrate an outstanding commitment to diversity and inclusion.
Breastfeeding-Friendly Employer Carnegie Mellon’s lactation support program has been recognized by the Pennsylvania Breastfeeding Coalition with a Breastfeeding-Friendly Employer certificate. The award distinguishes CMU as a leader in Pennsylvania, joining a growing number of businesses, schools and universities providing employee lactation support.
Breastfeeding-Friendly Employer
Carnegie Mellon’s lactation support program has been recognized by the Pennsylvania Breastfeeding Coalition with a Breastfeeding-Friendly Employer certificate. The award distinguishes CMU as a leader in Pennsylvania, joining a growing number of businesses, schools and universities providing employee lactation support.
Pro Patria Award Employer Support of the Guard and Reserve has presented Carnegie Mellon's Office of Human Resources with the Pro Patria Award — the highest level award that may be bestowed by an ESGR State Committee — in 2020, 2021 and 2022. Recipients of the award have demonstrated the greatest support to Guard and Reserve employees through their leadership and practices, including adopting personnel policies that make it easier for employees to participate in the National Guard and Reserve.
Pro Patria Award
Employer Support of the Guard and Reserve has presented Carnegie Mellon's Office of Human Resources with the Pro Patria Award — the highest level award that may be bestowed by an ESGR State Committee — in 2020, 2021 and 2022. Recipients of the award have demonstrated the greatest support to Guard and Reserve employees through their leadership and practices, including adopting personnel policies that make it easier for employees to participate in the National Guard and Reserve.
Textio Equity Award Carnegie Mellon University has received the inaugural Textio Equity Award , which recognizes organizations with the greatest share of gender-neutral job postings. Textio is the tool CMU uses to scan job posting language for gender bias and recommend more inclusive alternatives; the company reviewed language from customers’ job posts for 2020 and granted the Equity Award to the organizations with the highest percentage of job posts with a gender-neutral tone.
Textio Equity Award
Carnegie Mellon University has received the inaugural Textio Equity Award , which recognizes organizations with the greatest share of gender-neutral job postings. Textio is the tool CMU uses to scan job posting language for gender bias and recommend more inclusive alternatives; the company reviewed language from customers’ job posts for 2020 and granted the Equity Award to the organizations with the highest percentage of job posts with a gender-neutral tone.
The List: Colleges & Universities Carnegie Mellon was recognized by the Pittsburgh Business Times as one of the largest Pittsburgh-area colleges and universities . Ranking is based on full-time undergraduate enrollment.
The List: Colleges & Universities
Carnegie Mellon was recognized by the Pittsburgh Business Times as one of the largest Pittsburgh-area colleges and universities . Ranking is based on full-time undergraduate enrollment.