Report Concerns
These instructions are for CMU affiliates to report an issue with their University system or account, or if a CMU account is sending email scams or phishing attempts.
Concern Type
Required Action(s)
Reporting an email scam or phishing attempt to or from a CMU email account
Reporting an email scam or phishing attempt to or from a CMU email account
or Email iso-ir@andrew.cmu.edu or call ISO at (412) 268-2044 and include: If you clicked on a phishing email link or attachment, follow the Procedure for Responding to a Compromised Computer If you believe that you have been phished, follow the instructions for I Might Have Been Phished, What Do I Do? If you report a phishing message and receive an error/bounceback, it may be because ISO is aware of the malicious message and has already put safeguards in place
or
Email iso-ir@andrew.cmu.edu or call ISO at (412) 268-2044 and include:
If you clicked on a phishing email link or attachment, follow the Procedure for Responding to a Compromised Computer
If you believe that you have been phished, follow the instructions for I Might Have Been Phished, What Do I Do?
If you report a phishing message and receive an error/bounceback, it may be because ISO is aware of the malicious message and has already put safeguards in place
Suspect a computer you use for University related work or study is: Compromised (un-authorized interactive access) Infected by viruses, worms, or other malware Attacking other systems Mis-configured leading to security vulnerability or negative impact on University computing infrastructure
Suspect a computer you use for University related work or study is:
Compromised (un-authorized interactive access)
Infected by viruses, worms, or other malware
Attacking other systems
Mis-configured leading to security vulnerability or negative impact on University computing infrastructure
1. Follow the Procedure for Responding to a Compromised Computer 2. Email iso-ir@andrew.cmu.edu or call the ISO at (412) 268-2044.
1. Follow the Procedure for Responding to a Compromised Computer 2. Email iso-ir@andrew.cmu.edu or call the ISO at (412) 268-2044.
Suspect that Non-public Institutional Data was accessed by unauthorized individuals such as: A University computer or information system has been compromised. A computer, mobile device, or storage medium such as an external disk or thumb drive is lost or stolen. Non-public information is discovered to be accessible to unauthorized individuals, whether they are affiliated or unaffiliated with the University. Non-public information was accidentally or purposefully distributed to unauthorized individuals.
Suspect that Non-public Institutional Data was accessed by unauthorized individuals such as:
A University computer or information system has been compromised.
A computer, mobile device, or storage medium such as an external disk or thumb drive is lost or stolen.
Non-public information is discovered to be accessible to unauthorized individuals, whether they are affiliated or unaffiliated with the University.
Non-public information was accidentally or purposefully distributed to unauthorized individuals.
1. Follow the Procedure for Reporting Unauthorized Release or Access of Data 2. Email iso-ir@andrew.cmu.edu or call the ISO at (412) 268-2044.
1. Follow the Procedure for Reporting Unauthorized Release or Access of Data 2. Email iso-ir@andrew.cmu.edu or call the ISO at (412) 268-2044.
Reporting theft of a computer used for University related work or study
Reporting theft of a computer used for University related work or study
1. Report the theft to University Police 2. Email iso-ir@andrew.cmu.edu including relevant: registered hostname(s) physical (MAC) address last time used on campus network pre-theft
1. Report the theft to University Police
2. Email iso-ir@andrew.cmu.edu including relevant:
registered hostname(s)
physical (MAC) address
last time used on campus network pre-theft
Reporting electronic harassment involving a University affiliate OR a computer used for University work or study
Reporting electronic harassment involving a University affiliate OR a computer used for University work or study
File a complaint with University Police
File a complaint with University Police
Reporting a Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) violation
Reporting a Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) violation
Email dmca@andrew.cmu.edu
Email dmca@andrew.cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University Ethics Reporting Hotline The hotline is NOT an emergency service.  For emergencies, call University Police at 412-268-2323 or 911.
Carnegie Mellon University Ethics Reporting Hotline
The hotline is NOT an emergency service.  For emergencies, call University Police at 412-268-2323 or 911.
Toll Free:1- 844-587-0793 Via the Internet: cmu.ethicspoint.com
Toll Free:1- 844-587-0793
Via the Internet: cmu.ethicspoint.com
Advisory Notification: Note that the Information Security Office (ISO) may use email to alert you to an advisory situation; however, we will NEVER send attachments in e-mail messages as part of the initial notification. As a general rule, if you are in doubt about a message do not open it!