Dual Career Program
We are here to help!
CMU is committed to recruiting and retaining talented staff and faculty members, which often involves accommodating the needs of their partners and families. The Office of Human Resources and the Office of the Vice Provost for Faculty work closely with CMU faculty, deans and administrators across the university in addition to local university, community and industry partners in the Pittsburgh region to provide dual career assistance.
CMU’s Dual Career Program team is happy to assist eligible dual career candidates in their job search with the following services:
Career consultations
Internal and external referrals and networking opportunities with CMU faculty and staff members, in addition to other local university, industry, and community partners
General job search assistance and coaching
Please note that services are not provided for anyone currently employed in the Pittsburgh area, nor does participation in this program guarantee employment or job placement. We can neither create jobs nor intervene in an employer’s hiring process.
To participate in the Dual Career Program, you must b e the spouse or partner of a newly-hired full-time faculty or staff member who is in the process of relocating or has recently relocated to the Pittsburgh area. Spouses/partners currently employed in the Pittsburgh area are not eligible to participate in the program.
To request a consultation, please complete the Dual Career Consultation Request Form . Upon receiving your request, a member of the Dual Career Services team will be in contact to learn more about your background, experience and interests.
Frequently-Asked Questions
Is there funding for dual career positions? Funding for staff positions is not available. However, funding for faculty dual career partners is available in some situations, and requests are reviewed on a case-by-case basis as not each request can be supported.
Can you help me find employment at a nearby college or university? Pittsburgh has a lot to offer, including 34 colleges and universities in the region. We have partnered with other colleges in the area and can share your resume to identify opportunities that may fit your background if there are no current opportunities with CMU.
What types of jobs exist in the Pittsburgh region? Pittsburgh has always been known for the steel industry, but over the past few decades, it's become home to many other industries including healthcare, finance, technology, and artificial intelligence. Find more information on current industry trends in Pittsburgh .