Contact HR for Assistance
Email: hr-help@andrew.cmu.edu Monday–Friday, 8:30 a.m.–5 p.m. ET
When emailing the Office of Human Resources, please do not include personal information such as date of birth or Social Security number.
Accessibility Needs for Applicants
Carnegie Mellon University makes every effort to provide physical and programmatic access to individuals with disabilities. If you require an accommodation to participate in any part of the employment process, please email Disability Services or call 412-268-5072.
Students and visitors who require accommodation should refer to the Office of Disability Resources in the Office of the Vice Provost for Education.
Frequently Asked Questions
Can I send my resume directly to your office? We do not accept paper or emailed resumes and/or cover letters. To be considered for a staff opening, you must apply online. If you require an accommodation, please email Disability Services or call 412-268-5072. What is the status of my application? As soon as you submitted your online application, your information became available to the hiring department for review. The hiring department or a member of the Talent Strategy team will contact you if they have any questions and/or wish to schedule an interview. Due to the volume of applications received, we regret that we cannot provide individual status updates. Why is the position no longer showing on your website? Positions are typically removed from the site when the hiring department has received a sufficient number of applications and is no longer seeking additional candidates. In some cases, the hiring department no longer needs to fill a position. Once a position is removed from the site, it is no longer available for an application submission. The salary is shown as "Negotiable." How much does the job pay? All salary determinations are made at the hiring department level within university guidelines. The departments typically discuss this matter with qualified candidates during the selection process. Do you offer temporary positions? Yes! Temporary staff positions are primarily for administrative support and entry-level technical staff.