Hours and Directions
For more information about daily hours, directions, and upcoming events, head over to the Plan Your Visit page .
Smoking
The Frick is a smoke-free campus. All forms of smoking, including electronic cigarettes, are prohibited.
Wi-Fi
Free Wi-Fi is available throughout the site, including the Frick Art Museum, Grable Visitor Center, The Café at The Frick, and gardens.
Picnicking
Visitors may bring food and beverages for picnics or purchase food, beverages, beer and wine at The Café at The Frick during open hours. While visitors are encouraged to eat at The Frick’s Café, it does have limited seating and serves visitors on a first-come, first-serve basis.
Animals and Pets
Service animals are permitted in all public areas. All other animals and pets are not permitted on the Frick's grounds. See the Frick's Accessibility page for more information about service animals .
Visiting with Children
All ages are welcome in the mansion and gardens, although the Gilded, Not Golden tour of Clayton is best suited for children ages 9 and up. A coloring area and infant care room are available in the Grable Visitor Center. A play area is available in the Car and Carriage Museum, which is free and open to all.
When accompanying young children, please hold hands and stay together. Please leave large bags, coats, and water bottles in your vehicle or store them in a locker (available at the Grable Visitor Center and the Frick Art Museum).
Restrooms
Public restrooms are available in the Frick Art Museum, the Grable Visitor Center, and the vestibule to the Car and Carriage Museum. An infant care room is available in the Grable Visitor Center. An outdoor public bathroom is located across from the Café. Restrooms in the Café are available to Café patrons.
Photography and Videography
Still photography without flash for private, non-commercial use by means of phones, hand-held cameras and tablet devices is permitted throughout most spaces at the Frick. Photography is prohibited inside the historic mansion, Clayton. Videography and use of a tripod or other camera equipment is not permitted at any time without prior permission. Read The Frick Pittsburgh’s full photography policy here .
Private Events
Private events do occur during public hours on occasions. Guests are asked to be courteous and respectful when private events are taking place.
Navigating the Frick
The Frick Pittsburgh is an outdoor site. Navigating between areas requires walking on outdoor footpaths. The Frick's grounds team works hard to keep the site cleared of snow and ice, but severe weather or extreme temperatures can slow that process. On snowy or icy days, please come prepared:
Wear weather-appropriate footwear
Pay full attention when walking outdoors
When getting out of your vehicle, look down at the surface to check for ice
Take short shuffling steps in very icy areas
Walk with your hands free and able to assist with your balance, rather than in your pockets