Pittsburgh Film Organizations
Pittsburgh's film industry dates back to 1914 and boasts the world's first movie theater. Pittsburgh has been the location for more than 120 motion pictures and television productions since 1990 and currently is home to the largest sound stage outside Los Angeles and New York.
Because of Pittsburgh's rich film history, many independent and international film festivals take place in the region annually.
The Pittsburgh Film Office was founded in 1990 to promote the greater southwestern Pennsylvania region as a great location for movie, television and commercial productions. Since its inception, the PFO has brought more than 120 motion pictures and television productions to southwestern Pennsylvania to generate millions of dollars in economic impact to the region.
Film Pittsburgh presents independent films from around the world during four annual film festivals: JFilm , ReelAbilities, The Three Rivers Film Festival and Pittsburgh Shorts and Script Competition. The organization's programming is designed to reach a broad range of people and emphasizes collaboration with other organizations.
Pittsburgh is also host to such film festivals as the Banff Mountain Film Festival , CMU International Film Festival in the spring, as well as the Pittsburgh Independent Film Festival in the summer.
This unique program offers two thrusts: WQED Filmmakers which focuses on enriching adults in the film community and WQED Film Academy , student-focused programming for middle and high school students with opportunities to shoot on location or at the WQED Studios.
Movies Filmed in Pittsburgh
Hollywood film crews are drawn to Pittsburgh for its endless variety of architecture, neighborhood charm and great local support. More than 50 major films have been shot on location in and around the city during the past decade. Several films have also taken home prestigious honors, including the Academy Award-winning The Silence of the Lambs , Lorenzo's Oil and Hoffa . Other highlights include:
View an extensive list of films shot in Pittsburgh over the last four decades.