Up-and-coming economies you can invest in.
© razaklatif—iStock/Getty Images
Emerging market (EM) shares could give your portfolio a long-term tailwind, providing exposure to companies in fast-growing countries with developing economies.
But for every emerging market success story like South Korea, there’s a Venezuela or a Russia that struggles to move forward. Like anything going through a growth spurt, emerging market economies can have growing pains, and investors should be aware of the volatility this asset class often brings. That’s also why many investment experts recommend not devoting a huge chunk of your portfolio to emerging markets.
Understanding emerging markets
Emerging markets and developing economies account for close to 80% of global economic growth, almost double their share from two decades ago, according to the International Monetary Fund (IMF). They also account for close to 85% of the growth in global consumption, more than double their share in the 1990s. There’s no single definition for emerging markets, but they’re generally characterized as having:
Volatile markets. Emerging markets usually have more boom-and-bust business cycles compared to developed markets, in part because these economies rely heavily on commodity exports, which have their own cycles. Research from the St. Louis Federal Reserve shows that raw materials comprise 71% of aggregate exports in the average emerging economy.
Higher growth and investment potential. Emerging markets have a competitive advantage as exporters of low-cost and raw goods to richer nations, and many have adopted market-friendly policies to attract foreign investment.
Stronger economic growth. Many of these countries’ governments encourage industrialization as they move away from being commodity-based exporters. They tend to have younger populations relative to developed economies, as well as government and private investments in technology, infrastructure, and education that can fuel growth and wealth.
Emerging market success stories
A big emerging market success story is South Korea, which became a democracy in the late 1980s. After finding its footing, the country became home to several global companies, such as technology giant Samsung Electronics and automakers Kia Corporation and Hyundai Motor Company.
South Korea’s success is so significant that there’s a debate among index providers about whether the nation is still an emerging market. Index provider FTSE Russell considers South Korea a developed market. One of the largest exchange-traded funds (ETFs) by assets under management, Vanguard Emerging Markets (VWO), has no South Korean exposure. Other emerging market funds and ETFs do include South Korean companies, however.
China is another emerging market success story. The World Bank reports that since China reformed its economy in 1978, gross domestic product (GDP) growth has averaged almost 10% annually. The country boasts several internationally known companies, including Alibaba and Tencent.
Emerging market cautionary tales
Some emerging markets have backtracked economically. Venezuela, home to the world’s largest oil reserves, went from being one of Latin America’s prosperous countries to economic ruin after decades of poor governance.
Similarly, anyone who owned shares of Russian companies was stuck with significantly downgraded investments after Western nations boycotted Russian firms following the 2022 invasion of Ukraine.
Although any country can have a crisis, emerging markets are often more prone to geopolitical instability. Also, because many depend on raw materials for economic growth, price pressure in the commodities markets can be a problem.
Another danger of emerging markets is something that might be in your wallet right now. A strong dollar—particularly a dollar that’s getting stronger due to higher interest rates —can hurt emerging markets (see chart below). Many of these countries have dollar-denominated debt, and that debt becomes harder to fund when the dollar rises. Also, a strong dollar makes imports more expensive for emerging markets, which can slow economic growth, according to the World Bank.
How to invest in emerging markets
If you want to get some exposure to emerging markets, consider:
American Depositary Receipts (ADRs). These are non-U.S. company stocks that trade on U.S. stock exchanges, and their prices follow the prices of these companies in their home markets. Examples of emerging-market ADRs include Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing (TSM), Indian bank ICICI Bank (IBN), and Brazilian steel producer Vale S.A. (VALE).
U.S.-listed international exchange-traded funds and mutual funds. Mutual funds and ETFs hold many companies at once, so they can be more diversified than if investors tried to create their own holdings. They also are able to buy shares in companies that individuals can’t access. Check your 401(k) plan to see if it offers any emerging market mutual funds or ETFs.
How emerging markets can fit in a portfolio
Despite emerging markets’ higher risk/return profile , these investments could be worth including in a diversified portfolio .
Emerging markets tend to have a strong growth component. That means in a period of robust economic growth, investors can get higher returns in these assets versus developed markets. This is similar to how high-growth U.S. stocks often outperform when U.S. markets are rallying, said Pat O’Hare, chief market analyst at research firm Briefing.com.
Because of their high-octane action, O’Hare says, emerging markets investments should be a smaller proportion of anyone’s total portfolio versus the steadier developed markets. If you’re looking for international exposure without the typical EM volatility, you could consider a broader-based international fund —one that includes developed economies such as Great Britain, Germany, and Japan—in addition to emerging markets.
The bottom line
Emerging markets are like rubber bands. They can stretch and give investors growth and upward momentum during boom times, but they can snap back when market cycles turn. Although you might not want a high percentage of your portfolio in emerging markets—unless you have a strong stomach and nerves of steel—a modest allocation of 5% to 10% could add an extra layer of diversification .