The money goes in; what comes out?
© Kevin Mayer/stock.adobe.com, © Johnstocker/stock.adobe.com, © denphumi/stock.adobe.com; Photo illustration Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc
For many of us, purchasing a home is the biggest financial decision we’ll make in our lives. In fact, your home can be more than just the place you live—it can also be your most important asset. For generations, people have invested in their homes, taken out loans against their homes , and sold their homes to support themselves in retirement .
Your house can be where you plant your roots and the place your family calls “home.” But if you’re more of a rolling stone, renting might be the way to go, as buying and maintaining a home can be expensive and unpredictable.
It’s all about how you weigh the pros and cons to buying a house, vs. the pros and cons of renting.
Costs of buying a home
Buying a house comes with many expenses over many years. To buy and own a house, you will have to pay:
Down payment. This is paid up front—20% is a typical amount.
Closing costs. These typically range from 1.5% to 6% of the cost of the house.
Monthly mortgage payments. These vary depending on the price of the house, interest rates, and the length of the mortgage.
Real estate taxes. They vary widely depending on the state and municipality.
Maintenance and repair costs. Maintaining the house and yard will be up to you. You will also need to keep an emergency fund for the unexpected.
Homeowner’s insurance.
Condo or homeowner association fees. Some homes require membership in an association.
When you buy a house, you’re accepting the risk that the house might lose value over time. Plus, if you like to keep up with current trends, owning a home might mean periodic remodeling, refreshing, and landscape development.
The benefits of buying a home
Despite all those costs, buying a house is still an attractive financial proposition for many people. Although actual home price appreciation varies by location, historically, home prices have gone up an average of 3.8%. For example, the chart below shows median home values from 1961–2022.
Aside from the potential for value appreciation, there are other benefits to home ownership:
Mortgage interest deduction. You can typically deduct some or all of your mortgage interest payments on your tax return, depending on your tax situation.
Long-term predictability. Fixed-rate mortgages lock in a steady payment. So, in a way, a mortgage offers protection from inflation . And if you’re diligent about paying off your mortgage , eventually you’ll have no monthly payment (but you’ll still have the other costs outlined above).
Personalization. You can renovate and update your home to your tastes and preferences.
Home equity. This can help build your retirement nest egg , or you could borrow against the equity in your home .
Buying a home means planting roots, letting them grow, and pruning and shaping as you wish.
The costs of renting
Once you’ve assessed the pros and cons of home buying, do the same exercise for renting. You may have heard conflicting reports about whether it’s cheaper to rent or buy.
In an apples-to-apples comparison, the rental should cost more. After all, a place you’re renting is owned by someone, and that person or entity is on the hook for property taxes, maintenance, hazard insurance, and any association fees. Plus, because owning and renting property is a profit-seeking business, the landlord expects to earn a profit. They’re going to mark up the costs before passing them on to you, the renter.
A big difference shows up in the maintenance department. A landlord might be more likely to patch (rather than replace) a leaky roof, and less inclined to upgrade those countertops to keep up with trends. If you’re willing to sacrifice those bells and whistles, a rental might be cheaper for you. But there are a few unavoidable costs of renting:
Security deposit. This could be at least one month’s rent, but sometimes as much as three months’ rent. Although the landlord will return a security deposit (or a portion of it, depending on whether you’ve damaged the place) at the end of the lease, if you rent somewhere else you’ll need to post another one with the new landlord.
Broker’s fees. In some cities, these are the norm. They can be as high as 10% of a year’s rent.
Unpredictability. The landlord could raise the rent at the end of the lease, sell the building, or simply decide to rent to someone else.
No inflation protection. Rent will rise over the long term (versus fixed mortgage payments), and you’ll never pay it off.
According to the Census Bureau , between 38 and 42% of renters change their address each year, compared to just 9 to 12% of owners. Frequent moves might not be a big deal when you’re young—your buddies might help you move for the cost of a cooler full of beer and a few pizzas. But the older you get, and the more stuff you accumulate, the more moving costs add up.
The benefits of renting
There are certain key benefits to renting instead of owning, particularly if you might be relocating in the next few years:
Mobility. When you rent, you’re not tied down—you can move with relatively short notice and few costs.
Financial flexibility. Because you won’t be on the hook for the repair and maintenance of the property—and you aren’t required to fork over a hefty down payment—you can keep more of your emergency funds in longer-term investments and retirement savings.
No real estate risk. If the property declines in value, the owner takes the financial hit.
Renting means flexibility in your location, finances, and time. How do you value flexibility versus the benefits of owning?
The bottom line
In the end, the decision whether to rent or buy your home comes down to your personal situation. Do you have money for a down payment, or do you need to save for a few years? Is relocation in your future, or would you like to test out a few locations before you pick one? You might want to rent, at least for a while.
Alternatively, do you want to plant your roots, start a family, target a specific school district, or stay close to family? Do you have a dream home you can’t wait to create? It might be time to buy.
You’ll also want to evaluate the real estate market . Some communities have pockets of value, with decent schools and low property taxes, while others have a vibrant rental market with a lot of turnover. Be sure to compare the options in your area before deciding, and weigh the pros and cons against your short- and long-term goals.