Student Experience
Our MSCF program offers you a choice between two locations: our New York City location, near the New York Stock Exchange, and our Pittsburgh location, Carnegie Mellon’s main academic hub. Regardless of the location, you receive the same instruction from world-class faculty and professional support from a career services staff focused on the needs of MSCF students.
All courses are taught live and students at both locations are expected to attend course sessions. Faculty instruction originates from either location with course sessions broadcast to the alternate classroom with high-definition two-way audio and video, creating an easy-flowing interaction between professors and students. Faculty teach in New York twice every seven weeks and remain in New York following the lectures for discussion and social events. All lectures are streamed live and captured electronically for review throughout the duration of the semester. Office hours are available at both locations.
Student Clubs & Activities
Your experience outside of the classroom is also important, as the strong relationships you establish with your fellow students create a supportive learning environment and provide friendships enduring long after you graduate. Quant Leadership Alliance leaders from each location work closely with staff and students to create an engaging and active student life. Additionally, MSCF's students have the option to join student clubs, below is a listing of the most popular clubs. MSCF Students are also invited to join Tepper clubs .
Quant Leadership Alliance
The MSCF Quant Leadership Alliance (QLA) is a student-led initiative designed to enhance the MSCF student experience and foster a collaborative, enriching environment within the program. Comprising four key roles—President, Vice President of Academic & Career Development, Vice President of Quant Competitions & Trading, and Vice President of Student Engagement & Admissions—the QLA serves as a bridge between students, faculty, and staff. Each role focuses on distinct aspects of student life, from academic and career support to community building and organizing competitive events. By representing student interests, facilitating mentorship opportunities, hosting impactful events, and promoting a strong sense of camaraderie, the QLA plays a pivotal role in shaping the MSCF program's dynamic and supportive culture, ultimately preparing students for success in the quantitative finance industry.
Our thanks to Stevens Capital Management for their '25-26 sponsorship.
MSCF Women in Quant Finance
The Women in Quant Finance (WQF) is a student run club dedicated to empowering women in the field, creating opportunities to excel academically, thrive professionally, and lead with confidence. At the heart of WQF is a mission to close the gender gap in quantitative finance. The club aims to build an inclusive space for collaboration and growth while inspiring the next generation of women leaders.
The club hosts a wide range of events, including exclusive company visits, women-led panels, mentorship opportunities, and social gatherings. These activities are designed to provide members with invaluable connections, hands-on experiences, and insights into the industry. Collaborations with leading companies will further enhance the club’s offerings, opening doors for professional growth.
Alpha Club
The Alpha Club is a student organization at the Tepper School of Business centered on investment management. This club seeks to bridge the gap between the rigorous academic curriculum and the real-world management of investment portfolios. The club prepares students for careers in fields such as equity research, credit research, hedge funds, and portfolio management. Part of this involves competing in investment competitions against other top MBA programs. There is also an opportunity for real life investment management experience through the Tepper Opportunity Fund that is managed through the club.
More about the Alpha Club