A groundbreaking Carnegie Mellon University initiative will foster novel, innovative theatrical projects to enrich the cultural landscape of Pittsburgh and beyond. The newly launched Center for New Work Development is supported by an implementation grant from the Richard King Mellon Foundation as part of its strategy to revitalize and develop Pittsburgh's arts and cultural sector.
The Center for New Work Development will serve as a vital resource for CMU’s School of Drama, providing undergraduate and graduate students with educational for-credit opportunities to develop new plays, musicals and boundary-breaking work with professional artists at the helm. Utilizing a shared resource model, the center will collaborate with theaters and producers from the Pittsburgh area and beyond in order to build cost-effective and innovative ways to develop a page-to-stage pipeline. By nurturing a collaborative ecosystem between higher education and the professional industry, the center aims to set a benchmark for sustaining the future of live theatrical performance.
In this inaugural year, the center will partner with City Theatre Company, Kelly Strayhorn Theater, Pittsburgh Civic Light Opera, Pittsburgh Public Theater and the Pittsburgh Cultural Trust to produce readings and workshops around the city. The center’s first season will culminate in a full production co-produced with Play On Shakespeare that will reach audiences around the world.
As part of this new venture, Rick Edinger and Brannon Bowers have been appointed as the co-artistic directors, bringing their extensive experience and creative vision to lead this initiative.
"We are dedicated to creating a vibrant space where artists, students and audiences can come together to explore new narratives and ideas,” said Edinger, current chair of the Acting/Music Theater Program and associate professor of music theater at the School of Drama. “Our goal is to position CMU and Pittsburgh as a focal point for new theatrical productions, generating more national partnerships and collaborations that will strengthen our cultural economy."
Bowers comes to CMU from Northwestern University where they served as the producing director of the American Music Theatre Project since 2016. Bowers is also a current board member of the National Alliance for Musical Theatre. "We aim to deepen CMU’s relationships with Pittsburgh local theaters and fill in the development gap through the establishment of this center,” they said. “With the pressures facing the theatre economy, we can build a robust infrastructure to sustain our industry while providing essential education to students, quality development for artists and inspiring experiences for audiences.”
The center will have its central office at the Victory Building in Downtown Pittsburgh, thanks to a generous partnership with the Pittsburgh Cultural Trust. This partnership will help cultivate a strong programmatic connection between CMU and the local and national performing arts communities. For rehearsals and performances, the center will primarily utilize the newly renovated spaces at Three Stories as well as downtown venues like the Trust Arts Education Center and the Rauh Rehearsal Hall in the O’Reilly Theater, ensuring artists and students have access to the right artistic facilities for their work.
With a commitment to inspire and innovate, the Center for New Work Development is poised to transform the theater industry in Pittsburgh and create lasting impacts nationally for artists and audiences alike.
The center is a result of a 2024 Planning Grant received by Edinger (lead project investigator) and Bowers (lead consultant) from the Richard King Mellon Foundation. For its inaugural season, the center is funded in collaboration with Carnegie Mellon University’s School of Drama, the Richard King Mellon Foundation and six producing partners:
City Theatre Company
Kelly Strayhorn Theater
Pittsburgh Civic Light Opera
Pittsburgh Public Theater
Pittsburgh Cultural Trust
Play On Shakespeare
More details about the Center for New Work Development’s programming and initiatives will be announced this fall.