Specifically, through this historic partnership with the Mastercard Foundation, CMU-Africa will:
Expand instructional capacity, including introducing a new degree in engineering artificial intelligence, and online learning programs.
Grow the annual cohort of students enrolling in CMU-Africa by more than 33%.
Provide additional financial assistance to more CMU-Africa students, including increased support for the Mastercard Foundation Scholars Program (opens in new window) at CMU-Africa. The partnership will provide direct scholarship support to a total of 300 students.
Ensure programs recruit and provide opportunities for marginalized groups.
Pilot programs for English language immersion to help prepare undergraduate students from other African universities for graduate study.
The new partnership will also strengthen Africa's research, entrepreneurship and innovation ecosystem more broadly by:
Establishing a network of higher education institutions in Africa that will work with the private sector and governments to create the conditions for inclusive digital transformation.
Supporting as many as 10 African universities to deliver high-quality engineering and technology education.
Increasing digital knowledge creation to drive technology development and job-creating innovation through training, seed funding and collaboration opportunities for researchers at CMU-Africa and other partner universities.
Directly involving faculty and staff from CMU-Pittsburgh in CMU-Africa activities to innovate in education and help create the knowledge needed to drive the inclusive digital transformation of Africa in fields that include agriculture, health and finance, among others.
"The Mastercard Foundation's support will enable us to accelerate our Africa strategy, which is uniquely defined to prepare higher education students to meet the complex needs of the digital future along with the research and entrepreneurship necessary to compete in the global economy," said William Sanders (opens in new window) , dean of the College of Engineering.
The new initiative builds on a previous partnership between the Mastercard Foundation and Carnegie Mellon University, as well as a successful decade-long partnership between the Government of Rwanda and CMU-Africa that has connected 561 young people from 21 African countries to world-class training — including 125 students supported through the Mastercard Foundation Scholars Program. Through the strategic collaboration and generous support of the Government of Rwanda and the Rwandan people, CMU-Africa has built a strong educational platform that serves the continent.
"The strategic partnership with Carnegie Mellon University is one of the Government of Rwanda's key investments to support the development of a critical mass of skills in science and technology, particularly in [information and communications technology], required by the knowledge economy and to help accelerate Rwanda's and the region's socioeconomic transformation," said Valentine Uwamariya, minister of education in Rwanda. "We express our sincere appreciation to the Mastercard Foundation for their significant support, which will help Rwanda realize its vision for the future in establishing the Regional Center of Excellence in Rwanda (CMU-Africa) and ensure the sustainability of the program. The Regional Center of Excellence, coupled with other important strategies will help ensure that we are part of, and benefit from, the global digital revolution."
"The Mastercard Foundation has been a critical partner in the growth of CMU-Africa as we help meet the growing demand for high-quality technical talent who will accelerate development on the continent," said Allen Robinson (opens in new window) , director of CMU-Africa and associate dean for international programs in Africa. "This new, extraordinary phase of our relationship will exponentially magnify our ability to build a pan-African network that positively impacts the future of young people across the continent."