“It was surreal,” said Nikolai Stefanov, a senior studying physics and computer science and the mission control lead. “It’s not like we’re just shipping it off somewhere. We’re sending it to the moon. The next time we see Iris, it will be on the lunar surface.”
The Iris team has kept busy waiting for the new launch dates. Many members of the team — which includes students from across the university and at every level, from undergraduate to Ph.D. — are new and had to be brought up to speed with mission simulations and training. The team spent the last several months refining mission protocols and improving the software it will use to control and monitor Iris from Carnegie Mellon Mission Control on the university’s Pittsburgh campus.
Work didn’t stop on Iris either. Although the rover was secured to Peregrine in December 2021, the team has continued to add updated software to it. On Monday, a day before the new launch date was announced, Duvall and Connor Colombo, Iris’ chief engineer and an alum who has continued to work with Iris since graduating in 2021, uploaded improved imaging and mobility software to the rover.
“We were working right up until the last possible moment to get this right,” said Colombo, who earned master's and bachelor's degrees in engineering and robotics and currently works at Astrobotic. “We only get one chance at this.”
The Iris mission ticks many "first" boxes with its trip to the moon. It will be the first American lunar rover, the first student-developed rover, the smallest and lightest rover, and the first with both a carbon fiber chassis and wheels. The Iris mission demonstrates what is possible and could chart the future of planetary exploration.
The MoonArk project will be the first museum on the moon. The 10-ounce cylinder comprises four small chambers made of titanium, platinum and sapphire that contain hundreds of images, poems, music, nano-objects, mechanisms and samples from Earth. Collectively, these items tell complex narratives integrating the arts, humanities, sciences and technology. MoonArk represents the work of 18 universities and organizations; 60 team members; and more than 250 contributing artists, designers, educators, scientists, engineers, choreographers, poets, writers and musicians.
“The MoonArk aims to direct our attention from Earth toward the moon and outward into the cosmos, leaving a trace for our future selves to discover, decode and connect back in time to humans today," said Mark Baskinger (opens in new window) , director of the MoonArk project, p rofessor and chair of Product Design (opens in new window) , and director of the Joseph Ballay Center for Design Fusion (opens in new window) in the School of Design. "The triad of Peregrine, MoonArk and Iris establishes a new integrative narrative as we extend the reach and cultural imprint of humanity."