In September 2011, Trustee William S. Dietrich II stunned the Carnegie Mellon University community by announcing his intent to create a foundation (opens in new window) upon his death that would direct over half of its annual philanthropic support to the university. The nature of the plan for perpetual annual support, which was then valued at $265 million, was truly extraordinary. At the time, it was both the largest gift to CMU and one of the 10 largest to any U.S. university.
While Dietrich tragically passed away from cancer just one month later, his legacy as a visionary philanthropist and seminal force in Carnegie Mellon’s success story lives on. Today, the campus community reflects on how 10 years of Dietrich-funded investments have shaped the university and strengthened its future.
A Visionary Bequest
Decades before his passing, Dietrich already had begun to think about philanthropy, and had committed to using his wealth for the public good. He was inspired by the words of CMU’s founder, Andrew Carnegie: “The man who dies thus rich dies disgraced.” Dietrich also was inspired by Carnegie Mellon’s mission and achievements, both of which he witnessed firsthand as a Pittsburgh resident and university trustee.
“This university puts Pittsburgh on anybody’s world map of great research cities. Brilliant people come here as students and faculty, and their presence in our community adds something extraordinary,” Bill Dietrich replied when asked why CMU was such a special place. These superstar talents, he noted, “attract firms like Google and Intel, they create new companies and new ideas. They add to the city’s vibrant artistic and cultural life. They win Tonys and Oscars and Nobel prizes. They never stop exploring. They never stop looking for a better way to do something, and they never stop working to make things better tomorrow than they are today.”
In 1996, Dietrich donated the proceeds from the sale of his company, Dietrich Industries Inc., to fund a charitable trust. When he died 15 years later, Dietrich’s trust had grown to $500 million and ultimately funded The Dietrich Foundation, which today supports 15 organizations including CMU. These organizations are, for the most part, based in the businessman’s home region of Western Pennsylvania.
“Bill put as much thought and effort into giving away his wealth as he did in creating it in the first place,” said Ed Grefenstette, CEO and president of The Dietrich Foundation. “And for him, there was no greater opportunity than at CMU, which he wisely saw as a remarkable engine for the region that only needed more fuel to go faster and farther.”