Your AI Journey Starts Here
Gain the capacity and confidence to incorporate AI into your organization.
If your CEO said, ‘Let’s do AI,’ how would you respond?
As a manager without a technical background, you might think, ‘What even is AI? Could it really help us solve our problem? And if so, how do we make it happen?’
At Carnegie Mellon, we believe that anyone (even you) can become confident and capable in adopting AI solutions, regardless of technical expertise. With our Graduate Certificate in Managing AI Systems, you can learn to identify when AI is the answer (because sometimes it’s not) and - when it is - how to deploy, scale and sustain the right AI solution. You will gain foundational knowledge in the language of AI, basic technical concepts and an understanding of an AI project lifecycle so you can lead AI implementation with confidence.
Dive Deeper Into the Certificate with CMU's Dr. Rachel Dzombak
In this video clip, Dr. Rachel Dzombak introduces the Managing AI Systems certificate, who it's for, and what you'll learn. For a more in-depth explanation of the curriculum, an introduction to the faculty, and an inside look at the application process, watch the full info session today.
Watch the Full Info Session
A Systems-Thinking Approach
This program is about more than adopting a technical solution to solve an organizational problem. Using a systems-thinking approach, you will understand how AI impacts the entire organization and how you can drive organizational change around emerging technology. You'll learn how to think about risk, ethics, policy impacts and overall the bigger picture of your AI initiatives.
In just 12 months, you will build new skill sets and mindsets that will help you confidently and strategically manage enterprise-level AI projects. AI skills coupled with a newfound systems-thinking mentality will prepare you to spark transformative change in your organization and lead innovative AI initiatives far into the future.
As a student in the program, you will:
Learn how AI strategy aligns with organizational goals and objectives.
Gain hands-on experience in understanding the AI project lifecycle, from data collection and model selection to testing and deployment. You will develop the ability to oversee AI initiatives, monitor performance, and make continuous improvements to optimize outcomes.
Identify and address policy, risk and ethical implications of AI to ensure regulatory compliance and risk-mitigation as well as fairness, transparency and accountability.
Manage organizational change and foster a culture of AI adoption and innovation, as well as effectively address resistance to AI-driven changes.
Stay at the forefront of AI developments and continue to drive responsible AI management in any professional context.
A powerful certificate. Conveniently offered.
Designed for working professionals, the Graduate Certificate in Managing AI Systems is 100% online and features live-online classes taught by world-class CMU faculty - so you'll have real-time access to the experts. In addition, complementary coursework is completed on your own time, at your own pace, so you can easily fit the program into your busy schedule.
At the end of this 12-month certificate, students will leave the program with a new, comprehensive AI skill set they can immediately apply in the workplace and a portfolio of artifacts they can share with employers as evidence of their content mastery.
For the innovators
This certificate program is best suited for both technical and non-technical public and private sector managers, policymakers, and nonprofit leaders who want to learn AI so they can apply it on an enterprise scale to create efficiencies for and improve the effectiveness of their organization.