Pittsburgh Opera Supernumerary Opportunities
Have you ever wanted to dance with Carmen, serve at the Café Momus, or simply be onstage at the Benedum Center? Apply to become a supernumerary!
What is a Supernumerary? A Supernumerary—or “super”— is a non-singing, non-speaking role, much like an extra in film and television. Supers may perform as townspeople, guards, servants, and much more, providing silent but essential support to Pittsburgh Opera’s productions. Supers will share the stage with internationally renowned artists, work with celebrated directors and conductors, and experience the magic of opera from the Benedum Center stage.
Stage experience is helpful but not required, and all super positions are filled on a voluntary basis. Individuals of all ages, races, ethnicities, genders, and abilities are welcome and encouraged to apply.
Pittsburgh Opera Supernumerary General Information
Our larger productions will be presented at the Benedum Center in Downtown Pittsburgh. Staging rehearsals will take place at Pittsburgh Opera’s Bitz Opera Factory in the Strip District.
Pittsburgh Opera’s Supernumeraries are enthusiastic and dependable. Supers are required to attend approximately 10-15 rehearsals, generally nights and weekends, as well as all performances. The occasional daytime rehearsal may be scheduled.
Supers are paid a small honorarium of $100 and receive two (2) complimentary tickets, subject to availability. We are not able to offer housing or union credit for these roles.
How do I apply? Follow the link below to complete an application. No phone calls please.
Pittsburgh Opera Supernumerary Application
Please complete the application and submit a recent full-body photo. Applicants will be added to the Pittsburgh Opera Database and will be contacted via email as opportunities become available.
If it has been over two years since you last applied, you can update your information by filling out a new application.
If you would like to remove your name from the Pittsburgh Opera Supernumerary Database, please email kmartin@pittsburghopera.org.