Cultural District Dining
Dining at the Greer Cabaret Theater & Lounge
The gorgeously renovated Lounge at the Greer Cabaret and Greer Cabaret Theater offer elevated dining experiences in the Cultural District. Whether you're stopping in the Lounge for a craft cocktail after work or pairing a performance with upscale cuisine delivered to your Theater seat, this is the place where the performing and culinary arts meet.
Dining at the Lounge at the Greer Cabaret
Open to everyone, the Lounge at the Greer Cabaret offers upscale bistro fare and craft cocktails. Show tickets are not required for entry, so you can dine in whether you're headed into the Greer Cabaret Theater afterward, have tickets for another venue in the Cultural District, or are simply looking for a new Pittsburgh restaurant experience without plans to see a show. Reservations are available via Resy . Bar and table seating is also available on a first-come first-served basis.
Wednesday - Friday | 4-9 pm | Happy Hour 4-5:30 pm
Saturday | 5-8 pm
Sunday - Tuesday | Closed
Book A Reservation View Food Menu View Drinks Menu View Happy Hour Menu
Dining Inside the Greer Cabaret Theater
In-theater dining requires a ticket to a performance. Join us before the show for upscale comfort food and craft cocktails delivered right to your seat. Doors open 75 minutes prior to performance start time. Craving another cocktail during the show? You can order quietly and conveniently from your phone without missing a scene.
View Food Menu View Drinks Menu
Downtown Dining
Pittsburgh is quickly becoming known as a city on the forefront of the culinary scene. The Cultural District is fortunate enough to be located right in the heart of Downtown, surrounded by dozens of restaurants, bars and eateries. No matter your taste of budget, enjoy a relaxing meal before a show or cocktails and dessert at the end of the night — all within easy walking distance from the Downtown theaters.
Find the perfect restaurant for your Cultural District visit .