Employment
Equal Opportunity Employer
The Pittsburgh Cultural Trust is an equal opportunity employer. All applicants are considered for employment without attention to race, color, age, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, ethnicity, national origin, veteran or disability status.
The Pittsburgh Cultural Trust welcomes people from all backgrounds and walks of life. We seek candidates who demonstrate a commitment to diversity, equity, accessibility, and inclusion through continuous development, modeling inclusive behaviors, and proactively managing bias.
Open Positions & How To Apply
Chief Revenue Officer
About the Trust
The Pittsburgh Cultural Trust is a not-for-profit arts organization committed to presenting a wide range of quality performing and visual arts, providing comprehensive educational experiences, and stewardship of Pittsburgh's Cultural District as a national model of revitalizations through the arts.
Benefits of working at The Pittsburgh Cultural Trust
In addition to a competitive salary, The Pittsburgh Cultural Trust provides full-time employees with an excellent employee benefits package including:
Generous employee vacation/leave plan
Health, dental, and vision benefits
Employer paid life insurance
403(b) employee retirement plan with employer matching contributions
Discounted parking lease plan
Access to preferred ticketing for many Trust shows and events
To learn more about positions and to apply
Visit our Career Page , click on a job title above, or submit a resume along with a cover letter detailing your qualifications to the following address:
Pittsburgh Cultural Trust Attn: Human Resources 803 Liberty Avenue Pittsburgh, PA 15222 E-mail: employment@trustarts.org Fax: 412-456-5945
Internships
The Trust offers a range of internship opportunities. Visit our internship program page for more information.
Volunteer
The Trust's broad mission offers a number of opportunities to engage with the organization and the community. Visit our volunteer page for more information.
Stagehand Opportunities
This is a part-time, hourly position for a technician in the installation and operation of large touring theatrical road shows (e.g., Broadway tours), rock & roll shows, and other large stage performances such as opera and ballet. This individual should have the ability to follow direction and be an on the job learner. This is a union position with the International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees (IATSE) Local 3.
The stagehand reports directly to the Pittsburgh Cultural Trust’s House Carpenter and the Trust’s Production Management team. Stagehands must be available to work a flexible schedule (including evenings and weekends), often working long hours to accommodate performance and event requirements. Hours are offered via a hiring hall; stagehands accept calls that work with their schedule and their skill set(s). Union calls are issued based on seniority.
ESSENTIAL RESPONSIBILITIES: The following are examples but are not limited to the various types of job responsibilities.
Load and unload road cases, scenery, and materials from loading dock.
Assemble and disassemble scenery, stage equipment, and auxiliary items such as dance flooring.
Set up audio and lighting equipment, theatrical equipment, microphones, props, and auxiliary equipment such as orchestral music stands.
Move and rearrange furniture, set up risers, and operate scenery-moving machinery.
Assist with video, sound, and light production and/or maintenance.
Rigging which may include raising motors, lighting, and scenery out into the grid as well as lowering it onto stage.
Work with audio engineers, electricians, carpenters, and other backstage personnel.
Other backstage duties as assigned.
EDUCATION, EXPERIENCE, AND SKILLS REQUIRED:
Skill or ability to learn about stage equipment and various tools used. On the job training is provided.
Ability to work from oral requests and well as printed run sheets to achieve desired modifications/installation.
Willingness to work long hours, accommodating work schedule to requirements of performance and events.
This position is an I.A.T.S.E Local 3 position, and a part-time position with the Pittsburgh Cultural Trust, with an hourly rate of $29.06 along with benefits including pension. Please send cover letter and resume to: Todd Nonn at work.with.IATSE3@gmail.com . No phone calls, please.