Safety, Security, and Health
SECURITY SCREENING PROHIBITED ITEMS BAG POLICY GUEST CODE OF CONDUCT HEALTH CONSIDERATIONS
The Pittsburgh Cultural Trust wants you to feel at home in the Cultural District and in our venues. That means we are committed to making sure you—our guests, staff, volunteers, and artists—feel safe both physically and psychologically when you’re in our spaces.
Security Screening
Even before you take your seats, you can feel safe knowing that all guests are subject to a physical screening and inspection prior to entry. These security practices are in effect at the Benedum Center, Byham Theater, and O'Reilly Theater.
The screening process is enhanced by a security technology called EVOLV systems. Included in this system are contactless screening machines which allow guests to seamlessly walk through with their bags, coats, and permissible items.
By presenting your ticket and entering our venue, you consent to such screenings. Refusal of screening may result in denied entry. These protection measures have been put in place to ensure that each performance or experience is occurring in the safest environment possible for our guests.
Prohibited Items
The following is a list of outside items which are prohibited inside of venues owned and/or operated by the Pittsburgh Cultural Trust.
Weapons of any kind or facsimiles of weapons, including firearms, pellet guns, stun guns, martial arts weapons, pepper spray, pocket/utility knives or cutting instruments
Illegal drugs or substances
Flammable liquids
Fireworks, pyrotechnics, flares or incendiary devices
Glass, metal, or plastic containers of any kind including cans, bottles and flasks (plastic or metal water bottles are permissible but must be empty upon venue entry-unless for child or infant use)
Outside food or beverages including alcohol
Oversized bags that exceed 16” x 16” x 8”
Interchangeable/detachable camera lens (No professional photography-unless authorized)
Audio/visual recording devices.
2 way radios
Laser pointers
Laptops (tablets are permitted)
Beach balls, projectiles, balloons, permanent markers, spray paint
Drones
Flashlights
Signs, flags, banners
Selfie sticks
Guests without shoes or shirts
Masks which cover the full face (Halloween in nature or full face covering)
Face paints
Optical illusions
Jewelry that could be used as a weapon including chains and studded bracelets
Pets, other than service animals
Segways, skateboards, rollerblades, hoverboards, bicycles, helmets, any type of portable seat, other than those approved and required for accessibility
Noisemakers, bullhorns, or air horns
Unapproved pamphlets, handouts, advertisements
Unattended items left outside venue doors will be discarded to ensure guest safety.
This list is not all-inclusive and may change or be updated at any time without notice. Additional restrictions may apply.
Bag Policy
A guest to a Pittsburgh Cultural Trust venue or event may enter with one bag that is no larger than 16” x 16” x 8”. The definition of a bag includes, but is not limited to, purses, tote bags, duffel bags, suitcases, knapsacks, backpacks, packages, cartons, paper sacks, briefcases, portfolio cases, binocular cases, camera equipment cases, and any other type of device or vessel used for carrying or concealing items.
Bags are subject to search and theatergoers may be requested to open their jackets prior to entering. Guests with prohibited items may return them to their vehicles. Unattended items left outside the facility doors will be discarded to ensure patron safety.
Guest Code of Conduct
The Pittsburgh Cultural Trust is committed to providing you a safe, comfortable, and enjoyable entertainment experience. Guests have a right to expect an environment where everyone can and will:
Be treated in a consistent, professional, and courteous manner by all theater personnel.
Feel comfortable reporting inappropriate behavior to an usher, house manager, or security officer.
Comply with requests from venue staff and security regarding facility operations and emergency response procedures.
Sit only in their ticketed seats and show their tickets when requested.
Consume alcoholic beverages in a responsible manner and in compliance with law.
Not interfere with the event or performers in any way.
Not smoke or use tobacco-related products anywhere inside the theater at any time.
Not attempt to re-enter the venue without a ticket or appropriate credential.
Wear a shirt, shoes, and lower garments at all times.
Guests who engage in fighting, throwing objects, using foul/abusive language or gestures, attempting to enter restricted areas, or any other behavior deemed detrimental to the experience of other guests will be immediately ejected from the venue and may be subject to police action for these violations.
Your ticket is a revocable license exclusively valid for the event listed on the ticket and is subject to the full terms and conditions found here and terms located on ticket backs. Theater management reserves the right to revoke this license without refund for non-compliance with any Pittsburgh Cultural Trust terms and policies. Theater staff may intervene where necessary to ensure that the above expectations are met, and guests are encouraged to report any inappropriate behavior to the nearest usher, security guard, or staff member. Guests who choose not to adhere to these provisions may be subject to ejection without refund and, to the extent their conduct constitutes a violation of law, may be subject to arrest and prosecution.
Health Considerations
We want to make sure our venues not only keep you safe, but that you also leave healthy. If you feel sick, we ask that you prioritize your health and the health of others by staying home and contacting the box office for ticketing options.
Masks
Masks are not required while attending indoor events taking place at Pittsburgh Cultural Trust theaters and facilities. Our facilities are mask-friendly environments, and we ask that all guests be respectful of one another's choices.
Additional Layers of Defense
The Pittsburgh Cultural Trust has implemented additional layers of defense in our venues.
‘Gold Standard’ in Cleaning The Pittsburgh Cultural Trust practices the same gold standard of cleaning that is used by the Global Biorisk Advisory Council (GBAC) Star Facility Accreditation for stringent protocols for cleaning, disinfection, and infectious disease prevention in our facilities.
Restrooms are extensively disinfected prior to every event, including toilets, handles, sinks, countertops, soap dispensers, faucets, and adult and baby-changing stations. We have also installed new, touchless fixtures in many of our facilities.
High-touch areas throughout our venues, including door handles, handrails, countertops, and elevator buttons are being cleaned prior to all events.
We provide an ample supply of hand sanitizer and seat wipes. The Pittsburgh Cultural Trust has proactively placed hand sanitizers at every front door and throughout each of our venues. Seat wipe dispensers have also been added at central locations in every venue.
Clean Air in Our Venues We have improved overall air quality, expanded the use of high-efficiency filters, and added new HVAC technologies. The Trust has reviewed and improved air quality in all our venues. We have also equipped all HVAC systems with upgraded, Merv-16 rated filters, which have been identified to be much more effective in trapping microscopic particles, including COVID-19.