Our volunteers play an important role at The Pittsburgh Cultural Trust by providing support and leadership for our programs, projects and activities. Comprised of people of all ages and backgrounds, our corps of volunteers works to strengthen community awareness and public appreciation for the Trust, contribute to its financial strength, and provide vital support services to its staff.
Thank you for your interest in supporting the Pittsburgh Cultural Trust. To complete your Volunteer Application Form online, you will be directed to a new site powered by Better Impact, where you can create or log into an existing account.
Our priority is to help others enjoy the beautiful gift of art by creating a warm atmosphere and unforgettable experiences that excite and attract diverse audiences again and again to our venues and festivals. The Cultural Trust’s community of volunteers supports and cultivates an environment where all feel welcome to enjoy performing, visual, and public art.
We will provide a professional, first in-class guest experience for every visitor. Our volunteers and the outstanding service they provide to the community will be one of the many reasons people continue to frequent Pittsburgh’s Cultural District.
Through a more inclusive group of volunteers, we will strive to connect with all persons by creating a place where both volunteers and guests feel comfortable, accepted, and valued. We aspire to provide all with a fulfilling and gratifying experience in the arts.
Our volunteers will promote a strong sense of pride, community awareness, and public appreciation for the Cultural Trust by creating and enhancing relationships both within the Cultural District and beyond.
We believe...
Volunteers may participate in a broad spectrum of programs and activities depending on their interests and flexible options accommodate each volunteer's personal schedule. Daytime or evening, weekday, or weekend. There's often an activity to fit any schedule.
Giving is Rewarding. Becoming a volunteer makes you a part of theTrust family. As you share your talents and interests with fellow volunteers, you also learn more about the inner workings of the theater, its programs, and its role in the community.
Some of the other benefits include tickets to performances and an invitation to volunteer recognition celebrations.
Check out some recent highlights from the Volunteer Services newsletter — Good News — which shares highlights and stories from throughout the Trust's volunteer family.
We could not have done the VIP event without these fabulous volunteers tonight! Diana coordinated the event with the volunteers!
During our volunteer meeting we had the privilege of presenting Ruthie Fox with a medallion award and Circles lounge gift certificate as she was honored for the most number of hours volunteered in 2024!
Thanks to everyone who came out to enjoy our social gathering at the Harris Theater! We had treats, a special guest, and watched the movie White Christmas together!
A special thanks to volunteers Deb Blackburn, Rebecca Chembars, Susan Dusch, Denise Filippino, Ruthie Fox, Susan Gordon, Mary Jane Praniewicz, and Rosanee Rodgers for helping to setup decorations.
This past Saturday we officially welcomed in over 60 new volunteers into our program, including 30 new Beyond the Stage volunteers!
Deb Blackburn - October 21 there were ten of us volunteering for Dia de los Muertos activities and we spent the morning making bright tissue paper flowers, gluing ribbons and tiny clothespin's to monarch butterflies of different sizes (to write names of the deceased on and hung on the ofrenda at the Happy Hour,)  plus fluffing long strings of marigolds that arrive compressed. We all enjoyed creating different colored/sized flowers, with the smaller to be attached to sugar skulls on another day.  According to Mexican belief Monarch butterflies are said to be the souls of the dead.
“Loved the show. Staff was excellent including handling what appeared to be a medical issue with a guest during the performance.”
“Justin [Blain] is amazing front door greeter. He always greets me with a welcome and smile.”
"Your facility was lovely. Your employees were so nice and helpful. It was super easy to get into the building."
A shoutout to Deb Blackburn, Kim Janocko, and BTS volunteers Carola, Amayla, Abigail, and Camille for coming in to help make name tags for the new volunteers!
I had the pleasure of working with 4 Beyond the Stage students. Amelia, Madison, Jean & Sam. These young ladies were very professional & friendly with the patrons. They engaged very well with everyone, & asked questions if they were unsure. They have bright futures ahead of them. What a joy to have bright, energetic, students to be a part of our family! Great job girls!
I asked Volunteer Wayfinder Daniel Kerr to be positioned halfway up the slope at the Byham for the dance show on Saturday 11/16. He went above and beyond what needed to be done. He spoke almost non-stop welcoming patrons and offering directions with a smile. Well done, Dan. 
I discovered he's also a math wiz as he demonstrated to me and ticket scanners Paulette Sadowski, Barb Murdick, and Kim Pfadt. You could tell he enjoyed what he was doing.
October 15 - Front of House Training
We had a great training with the majority of the Front of House team present! Ashley led the teambuilding exercises and orchestrated a very fascinating scavenger hunt for the staff to complete!
September 21 – CLO Shirley Jones Celebration – Mary Levine
September 12 – Hamilton – Janet Schock
Hooray for Hamilton!
Volunteer Appreciation Party 23-24
Beyond the Stage - Year 3 – Vinay Thomas
I am thrilled to share that recently I returned to CAPA to recruit additional students to the Beyond the Stage program. Several have already applied, and these new volunteers will be onboarded into our program this fall! Best of all, I had current students in the program speak of their experiences to the other students, creating a leadership opportunity for them.
August 10, 2024 – Idina Menzel – Dave Swoager
The five volunteer experiences I've had so far have confirmed to me that I've made the right decision to join all of you.
August 1, 2024 – Chandelier Event – Alex Blue
We had a great turnout this evening. Everyone was so excited to see the chandeliers getting cleaned and be able to walk around the stage. A big thank you to the ambassadors Justin Blain and Amanda Rice for assisting us by directing people where to go for the stage. Also, a big thank you to the ushers who helped me on stage throughout the event helping patrons. Thank you everyone. What a great evening with great teamwork!
Seussical the Musical– Photo by Jonathan Nadle
Looks like some of our fabulous FOH and volunteers have agreed to join the cast of Seussical!
July 25, 2024 – Betterblock – Denise Morelli
Spent the day with one of my mentees, Krystal Marshall, painting at The Backyard. Krystal recently moved from Georgia with her parents and decided to join PCT to meet people. If you happen to see Krystal be sure to welcome her to Pittsburgh and ‘the PCT family’.
July 13, 2024 – Brad Williams – Connie O'Connor
New Volunteers!
June 6, 2024 – Three Rivers Arts Festival – Denise Morelli
Not only does Susan Gordon go above and beyond by providing a sweet start to events with her notorious Candy Bag, but she also added the extra touch at the TRAF booth sitting. Notice the booth owner’s dog in this picture. Her dog sitting business came in handy in providing professional knowledge adding to the PCT magical experience.
2024 Children's Theater Festival – a success!
Beyond the Stage – Awards Ceremony
We successfully wrapped up year 2 of the Beyond the Stage volunteer program with an awards ceremony. Special thanks to Hayley Haldeman who attended and spoke with the students!
Special shout out goes to Madison who was the most active student for the second year in a row! She had 75 hours this year and received an Outstanding Act of Volunteer Service (OAVS) medallion!
This academic year, we had 37 people in the program participate, and they totaled 1150.24 hours volunteering! That averages out to about 31 hours per student!
BTS volunteers participated in over 45 different shows throughout the year!
They volunteered at many different locations!: Benedum, Byham, Greer Cabaret, Liberty Magic, Gallery Crawl, Children's Theater Festival, JazzLive, Three Rivers Arts Festival, First Night Festival, Artist Car Workshop
April 30, 2024 – Hayley Haldeman Ticket Scanning
Hayley, the Cultural Trust's Chief Administrative Officer, scanned tickets during the April 30 Jesus Christ Superstar shift!
April 30, 2024 – The Passion of Mary Cardwell Dawson – Marilyn Egan (Pittsburgh Opera's Director of Education)
I was impressed with the FOH staff and security at the Byham last night. Greg, Goia, and Caleb went out of their way to help patrons with visual impairments get through security, ticket scanning, and move up the LONG ramp at the Byham. Don Sivavec, House Manager, was also helpful with wheelchair use on the ramp AND in the theater. Some of our patrons have multiple disabilities and the PCT staff has been caring and helpful to them in so many ways.
April 24, 2024 – Harris Theater Rent screening
Thank you to the 80 volunteers that came to the Harris Theater to watch RENT! We hope everyone had a wonderful time and enjoyed the tasty popcorn, prizes, and camaraderie!
April 19, 2024 – Greer post-show event – Kathy Griffin
April 19, 2024 – Company – Paul Armbruster
On the Friday, April 19, performance of Company I experienced something in all my fourteen years as an usher plus two years as a manager, that I never experienced before. I was standing at Mezzanine house left when a young man came up to me and said, “My wife is immunosuppressed and where we are sitting there are a lot of people around us. Would it be possible for us to move where there are less people?” Fortunately for them the Mezzanine and Balcony levels did have many empty seats that night. I replied, “I can move you into this row (pointing at row K."
I felt compelled to talk to the couple so I moved into the empty row and while leaving a seat between us I asked the girl, “Are you a recipient?” She replied that she was a heart recipient. I said to them, “I am a recipient as well. I had a liver transplant and this coming October 5th will be 22 years since my transplant!” Their eyes opened wide with amazement. She informed me that it is almost one year since her transplant operation. We briefly talked about transplantation then I left them to enjoy the show. However, I felt, and I think that she felt as well, an immediate and unique bond between us. It was the first time I met a patron who was a fellow recipient.
I know that after such a serious operation how it’s natural to have a fear that something still may go wrong. However, I hope that I was able to provide her with some inspiration that her future would be bright. As they passed me on their way out after the show the young man extended his hand and as we shook hands, I wished them “Good luck!” Although they were both wearing masks, I could clearly see that they were both smiling from ear to ear. Maybe, just maybe, I made a difference that night.
April 13, 2024 – Dog Man the Musical – note from a Patron
My family and I visited the Byham Theater yesterday, April 13th for the DogMan Musical with my 8-year-old son who is an AVID DogMan fan, and we just wanted to let you all know about the absolutely FANTASTIC time we had! We often use Kulture City sensory bags when we visit PNC Park, so when my son learned that they were offered at the theater, he was thrilled. From the moment we entered, though, the staff was phenomenal - friendly, knowledgeable, accommodating - fabulous all around! This was our first visit to this theater, but rest assured we will return! Thank you so much for a great experience! My son had the night of his life, and we enjoyed watching him have a blast.
April 13, 2024 – Barb Mills
I was in the ladies room leaving @ the Opera Brown Bag recital, & I overhead a random patron waiting in the long line. 'When I go to the Benedum, the ushers there are so nice & do a great job of moving the Ladies Room line along'. I said Thank You on behalf of the Cultural Trust Staff; she had no idea I am an usher! My heart smiled.
April 11, 2024 – Wait! Wait! Don't Tell Me! – Laura Kubicki
I want to give a huge shout-out to the "Dream Team" of six volunteers on the Mezzanine Level during the Thursday, 04/11 performance of Wait! Wait! Don't Tell Me! Kudos to Judy Cunningham, Denise Filipino, Linda Cwynar, Carol Yurechko, Sandra Deforno, and Kim Weismann. These fantastic ushers worked extremely well together - a true team effort! Judy, Denise, Linda, and Carol seated patrons quite efficiently and with great enthusiasm. Kim and Sandra were Directors and stationed outside each Mezzanine door. They welcomed each guest, checked their tickets, and accurately directed patrons onto the Mezzanine level or up to the Balcony level. This teamwork was very much appreciated by a sold-out theater of patrons. Thank you all once again!
March 31, 2024 – Mamma Mia
A special shout out to all the volunteers and staff who participated during a busy Easter weekend with sold out shows!
March 29, 2024 – Mamma Mia – Jonathan Nadle
During the Friday evening show, a couple was brought into guest services for a ticket issue - one that apparently wasn't of their own making. It was pushing 8 PM and Matt worked quickly to get them good tickets. The gentleman looked concerned, so I reassured him they still had 7 minutes to be seated. He looked relieved and thanked us, saying, "Everyone is so helpful. That's why we keep coming back." I directed them to the proper inner lobby door, another usher took over, and they made it to their seats just before the hold.
March 19, 2024 – La Traviata – Barbara Mills
I ushered my first Opera last evening in the Mezzanine with Wayne [Madden], and I loved it. The Opera patrons were very gracious! I loved it so much I emailed Mr. Christopher Hahn, thanking him for keeping Opera alive in Pittsburgh. He responded quickly, and was touched that I reached out. My next show to usher is Herbie Hancock, which I am looking forward to.
March 17, 2024 – La Traviata – Diane Reimer
House manager Jordyn Smith always stops by to speak to the ushers during a performance to ask how it's going and to say thanks. I was working on the Promenade on Saturday evening when she stopped by during an intermission. She has done this every time when I have been there for a performance and she is a house manager. I appreciate that she takes the time during a show to do this. Thank you, Jordyn!
February 16, 2024 – PBT Beauty and the Beast – Diane Basty
I had some wonderful experiences at the Friday night performance of the ballet, Beauty and the Beast, at the Benedum. Great reminders of how fortunate we are to work for The Trust and with one another. We, as a whole, provide and receive great reward in what our roles are within our venues. As a backdrop, the sparkle of the snow set a beautiful outdoor setting. A distinguished gentleman turned to me with noticeable excitement as he entered the Benedum and said, “we’ve never seen snow before, we’re from Texas!”. His awe stayed with me the duration of the night. If that wasn’t enough, shortly following this, a car pulled up and as we approached the car door, the most adorable young girl stepped out in full ball gown; head to toe, as Belle! She stopped the show for us. You never know what’s around the corner!
Note from Susan Godron
A sweet little girl gave me this picture she drew
February 21, 2024 – The Life and Music of George Michael – Justin Williams
I wanted to take a moment to acknowledge Dan Hadfield for his pragmatic resolution of an issue in Box 112 tonight. The guests with those seats requested 3 bariatric chairs and we only had 1 available. Dan spoke with them and was able to provide a bench and the guests were very pleased with his accommodation. Additionally, Paul Armbruster was able to assist a guest that was apprehensive to use the stairs from the balcony elevator to Row F by allowing her and her companion to sit in Row L on the Gallery Level.
February 23, 2024 – Rainbow Fish Student Matinee – Kevin Wilkes
Our FOH team had the Friday Fish (Rainbow) Special in full effect at the Byham today! Our House and floor managers were great today as well as well as all of our fantastic volunteers. They took extra special care of all the little tadpoles today. They Byham was filled with children for some great programing from our Trust Arts Education team. Special shoutout to Mary Levine! She was a rockstar as our bus wrangler. She left no student behind . Kudos to EVERYONE!
Greer – Judy Campagna
I wanted to let you know how much I love working at the Greer with Don and his management staff. Feel like part of the family there…even with waiters, bartenders, and bar manager. Really enjoyed the show The Perfect Mate and we had a really nice volunteer crew working it.
First Night
A highlight of the evening was the revamped tours program with trained staff and volunteers this year. In total, we gave tours to over 900 people at the Benedum and 700 at the Byham!
Most Hours Volunteered in 2023
She’s done it again! Ginny Kasserman finished with the most hours for the second consecutive year in a row. In 2023, she had a staggering 703.18 HOURS. To put that in perspective, that equates to over 29 FULL DAYS of volunteering in a year! (That’s more than all of February – even in a leap year!) As a reward for her incredible services, Ginny received a complimentary one-year membership to the Trust donors’ lounges! We are thankful to everyone who contributes their time to create magical guest experiences with us year-round, and we are especially grateful to Ginny for her enormous contributions!
Thank you for all that you do, Ginny!
December 2, 2023 – Mrs. Doubtfire
November 26, 2023 – Phyllis Boykin
What a treat for some FOH team members- the true stars of the evening! What an honor to have a picture with the famous Mirror Ball trophy from Dancing With The Stars.
November 20, 2023 – Laura Kubicki
Kudos and a huge thank you to the “Dream Team” of Cindy McCormick, Linda Cwynar, Carol Yurechko, Ruthie Fox, Nancy Geraci, Sharon Greb, Michelle Radziminski, and Kim Weismann - the eight volunteer ushers who worked the sold out Rock Orchestra by Candlelight show! They worked fabulously together as a team, whether it be seating patrons, pleasantly interacting with many first-time patrons, covering the long line at the ladies room during intermission, or taking turns guarding the ever-important exit doors, they did their roles with enthusiasm and gusto! Thank you all!
October 31, 2023 – Christine Castner
I feel very much a part of a team and my role as a volunteer is that of support. My eyes have been opened to the depth of the Cultural Trust and I am amazed at this remarkable organization within our city. I am proud to be able to be connected to and support the Trust. I am being rewarded with remarkable benefits of experiences with every shift I am able to take. I truly love this volunteer experience.
October 23, 2023 – Beyond The Stage Launch & New Volunteers – Vinay Thomas
I am so thrilled to share that we have launched year 2 of our Beyond The Stage student volunteer program with just over 30 new students from CAPA!
In addition to the students, we also welcomed in many new volunteers this weekend at the latest new volunteer orientation!
October 6, 2023 – Sugar Skull Student Matinee
October 1, 2023 – Artist Car Workshop – Barb M.
It was a great day for the Artist Car Workshop. Cultural Trust Volunteers, Barb Martinelli and Shelly Hartge pitched in to help artist, Cheryl Capezzuti, and her crew prepare cars for the downtown Pittsburgh New Years' Eve celebration.
September 27, 2023 – Moulin Rouge – Roseann B.
Being emeritus I’m not able to usher as often as I’d like, but when I do it’s always great! Especially the opening night of Moulin Rouge. Not only was the show so good, but the people I encountered really made my evening! There was the couple who had just moved from Wisconsin and was so thrilled to be there, the gentlemen who had never been to the Benedum and was in awe of our beautiful theater and, of course, the people I worked with. Our floor manager, Erica in the mezzanine, was so nice and fun!. I enjoyed ushering and talking with Andrea, who had some very interesting stories, and of course my BFF, Louise who I met as a result of ushering. And it’s always nice when I get to see ladies and gentlemen who I’ve met over the years. You know who you are. When people say we do this to see the shows they may be right but it’s so much more than that!
September 25, 2023 – Note from Denise M
Everyone has been beyond welcoming and kind. I’m loving my experiences. Thank you.
September 24, 2023 – Bluey's Big Play – Deb B.
My Grandson, Clark and I attended the Saturday morning Bluey performance! He had the time of his life meeting my fellow Volunteers/Floor & House Managers, and particularly getting a big soft pretzel and Bluey light toy! The theater was full of Bluey fans!
September 22, 2023 – Beyond The Stage Year 2 Launch – Vinay T.
We are continuing our Beyond the Stage program and have added more student volunteers from Pittsburgh CAPA. The program begins soon and you will see these students in the theaters following the next orientation on October 21!
September 15, 2023 – Tick, Tick..Boom! – Carol W.
Shout out to Kathy who was one of the first five ushers to work the new Greer and help management there iron out kinks before tickets go live.
September 14, 2023 – Steve Martin & Martin Short – Carol W.
Shout out to new usher Sylvia, who I worked with on the prom on Thursday night for Steve Martin and Martin Short. It was really busy, and she expressed frustration that she made a couple of missteps. But she was a star in my eyes. She worked like a trooper, climbing up and down the stairs, helping people to get to their seats. And she stuck with it. She’s going to be a great usher. Let’s encourage her!
September 13, 2023 – Ray LaMontagne – Crystal S.
Frank -ticket scanner - is always very happy and enthusiastic. Frank's energy is contagious. Also willing to share a laugh with a very cute joke.
September 11, 2023 – Volunteer Appreciation Party – Vinay T.
I am so delighted to share a special good news edition following our amazing Volunteer Appreciation Party last week at the Byham. We say it time and time again, but we are so thankful to you volunteers for going above and beyond to provide a magical guest experience and make our events so successful. We KNOW we have the best volunteer family in the world! The evening was filled with food, entertainment, prizes, ducks, bingo, and so much more!
May 23, 2023 – John Mellencamp – Carol W.
Went to the John Mellencamp concert and all we got were these silly armbands! LOL, for about 5 minutes we were fill-ins in the fourth row from the stage.
May 26 – Beyond the Stage Awards Ceremony – Vinay T.
We successfully concluded the first year of the Beyond the Stage program, which saw more than 20 CAPA students volunteer with the Pittsburgh Cultural Trust for a school year — with a final awards ceremony meeting where the students met with CEO Kendra Ingram. In total, the students committed 1456.583 hours as volunteers. That averages out to approximately 60 hours per student in just 8 months (Sept 2022 – May 2023). Students volunteered for over 60 different events at the Benedum, Byham, Liberty Magic, Art Galleries, Gallery Crawls, the Children’s Theater Festival, the Three Rivers Arts Festival, the Humanities Festival, and even the UPMC Rink at PPG Place!
June 2, 2023 – KANSAS – Emily B.
The team tonight did a really great job with the pre-show event. Everybody helping out (Diane, Rachel, Mary and Amanda) was extremely willing to roll with the punches and do whatever was needed to make the event happen.
June 3, 2023 – Pride Festival Volunteers - Jonathan F.
Just wanted to send along a huge thank you the volunteers: Kathleen, Mali, Dawn, Deb, Deb, & Dana. I leaned on them hard, it was busy, chaotic at times, and hot, and they were all smiles, helpful, and kind to all the festival goers. There’s no way this booth would have been successful without them – I hope they had a good time and felt valuable, because each of them were rockstars. Special shoutout to Deb B. for her staying from start to end – so grateful to her and her generous donation of her time and energy!
June 2-11, 2023 – Dollar Bank Three Rivers Arts Festival - Vinay T.
If I were to capture every single comment and moment I personally witnessed, along with everything you all reported to me, we'd have to publish a "TRAF Good News" book! We successfully gave away every single Dollar Bank tote bag, captured a lot of survey feedback, and so much more.