Featured Stories
Tues. September 30, 2025 | While flipping through our archives, we noticed something especially interesting about this time of year. Tues., September 9 | For the second year in a row, the Cultural Trust was proud to honor three outstanding individuals through the 2025 Icon Awards. Wed., August 20 | Join Ace, a young black lab, on a special tour through the Benedum. Wed., August 13 | Magic with Messado, a community engagement program, helps children build confidence, practice public speaking, and exercise problem-solving skills, all while experiencing the art of illusions. Wed., July 23 | Learn how the lactation room at the Byham Theater came to be and experience it through the eyes of a mother and Cultural Trust supporter. Wed., July 16 | Katie Colwell, Director of Operations, and Christine Wagner, Operations Manager, share their Benedum seating recommendations based on their expertise and personal preferences. Wed. June 25, 2025 | Acclaimed citizen artist vanessa german and our Director of Galleries & Public Art, Anastasia James, share their reflections after collecting handprints and connecting with elders at a local senior center. Fri. June, 20 | If you’re curious about the impact the Cultural Trust is making in the Cultural District and across communities, check out our 2024 Annual Report—hot off the press! Mon, June 16 | It was a magical day at the Benedum as 300 students from nine Pittsburgh-area schools took the stage for the Disney Musicals in Schools Student Share Celebration. Mon., June 2 | For the first time, visitors will be able to explore the arts festival using sensory-friendly and tactile maps. Wed., May 7 | Now in its third year, Beyond the Stage has evolved from a pilot program into a growing base of student volunteers. Vinay Thomas, who spearheaded the program, reflects on its growth and impact on students. Mon, Feb. 3 | Whether you’re celebrating Valentine’s Day with a special someone, friends, or flying solo, the Cultural District is the perfect place to spend it. Mon, Jan. 13 | Tess Dally helps us to kick off our newest blog series as she shares her experience with our accessible bars, platform seating, and more during her visit to see MJ the Musical at the Benedum. Wed, Nov. 27 | Want more Broadway? Creative Conversations and Broadway Talk Backs allow you to explore the world of theater more closely. Wed, Oct. 23 | Join us in honoring the rich traditions of Día de los Muertos and celebrating the memories of those who have touched our lives! Fri, August 30 | Experiencing theater is special, so why not share it with the people who matter most? Thurs, Aug 1, 2024 | Nine families experience the power of music to connect, inpsire, and express love. Thurs, July, 18 2024 | We’re transforming the Giant Eagle Foundation Backyard into your new favorite hangout! From pickleball and fashion markets to live music, food, and games, here’s your guide to making the most of summer in Pittsburgh! Fri, June 26, 2024 | The Three Rivers Arts Festival is more than an event- it's a beloved summer tradition that brings people together in unexpected ways. Thurs, June 13, 2024 | Meet Ginny and learn how volunteerism changed her life. As we prepare to bring our ten Broadway in Pitttsburgh shows to the Benedum Center, explore what makes each production sing on its own and harmonize as a collective. Tuesday, Feb 6, 2024 | In celebration of Liberty Magic’s fifth anniversary, we’re traveling through time and taking a close-up look at the tricks and triumphs behind Pittsburgh’s home for magic. Tuesday, Dec 12, 2023 | Give the gift of experiences this holiday season Learn more about the multi-year process of bringing a new look to the Cultural District. Ready to make some spring plans? We've compiled a list of some arts-related events in Pittsburgh that we think you will enjoy. Vice President of Broadway Programming Marc Fleming pulls back the curtain on the 2023-2024 PNC Broadway in Pittsburgh Season. Thursday, February 23 | The Pittsburgh Humanities Festival presented by Citizens has something for everyone. Another Black History Month is upon us and we are back with another round up of ways to support Black art and artists in the Cultural District and beyond! Wednesday, December 14 | With the holiday season in full swing, we’re here to help you find the perfect gifts while supporting local businesses in Downtown Pittsburgh. Friday, Nov 11, 2022|The Pittsburgh arts scene has plenty to offer before and after Thanksgiving. Wed, Oct 12, 2022 | Learn the ins and outs of sign language interpreting a PNC Broadway in Pittsburgh show. Hadestown makes its way to the Benedum Center, November 15 - 20 as a part of the PNC Broadway in Pittsburgh series and we have another featured dining partner for you to enjoy before or after the show! Mon, Apr 11, 2022 | Vice President of Broadway Programming Marc Fleming pulls back the curtain on the 2022-2023 PNC Broadway in Pittsburgh Season. Tues, Oct. 22 | Our doors are always open to students! Learn how you can embrace your creative side and take a break from your usual school routine through affordable, conveninent, and fun arts experiences. Wed, Oct. 16 | The Pittsburgh Cultural Trust and VaultArt Studios have joined forces to promote the inclusion of artists with disabilities in contemporary art. Wed, Oct. 9 | Celebrate the fall season with a variety of free and low-cost events in the Cultural District. Monday, Sept. 9 | For the first time, we presented the Pittsburgh Cultural Trust Icon Awards to three remarkable individuals who have made a lasting impact on our community. Tues, September 3 | Prepare for your next visit to the theater with a few easy steps. Thu, Mar 5, 2020 | Artists to Watch shines the spotlight on the incredibly talented artists who create right here in Pittsburgh! Fri, Feb 14, 2020 | Pull back the curtain and learn more about the Benedum Center's one-of-a-kind stage and orchestra pit! Mon, Feb 24, 2020 | Coming in early March: The Standard Market & Pint House (947 Penn), a one stop eatery that features health conscious but delicious bites. Fri, Jan 10, 2020 | Learn how over 50,000 LED lights, an illuminated billboard and the skull of Nobel Prize nominee Claude Shannon are actually the untold emblems of Pittsburgh’s identity. Wed, Dec 11, 2019 | Artists to Watch shines the spotlight on the incredibly talented artists who create right here in Pittsburgh! Thu, Sep 12, 2019 | Learn about this Pittsburgh luminary's long career in show business. Tue, Aug 20, 2019 | At the Byham Theater, a century-old artifact lives amid modern rigging, lighting and sound equipment. The theater's original fire curtain still hangs in the loft — only seeing the light of day once a year. Fri, Jul 26, 2019 | From Gallery Crawl pop-ups to writer’s sanctuaries, there’s something special to be said about  Pittsburgh’s alleyways.
Tues. September 30, 2025 | While flipping through our archives, we noticed something especially interesting about this time of year.
Tues., September 9 | For the second year in a row, the Cultural Trust was proud to honor three outstanding individuals through the 2025 Icon Awards.
Wed., August 20 | Join Ace, a young black lab, on a special tour through the Benedum.
Wed., August 13 | Magic with Messado, a community engagement program, helps children build confidence, practice public speaking, and exercise problem-solving skills, all while experiencing the art of illusions.
Wed., July 23 | Learn how the lactation room at the Byham Theater came to be and experience it through the eyes of a mother and Cultural Trust supporter.
Wed., July 16 | Katie Colwell, Director of Operations, and Christine Wagner, Operations Manager, share their Benedum seating recommendations based on their expertise and personal preferences.
Wed. June 25, 2025 | Acclaimed citizen artist vanessa german and our Director of Galleries & Public Art, Anastasia James, share their reflections after collecting handprints and connecting with elders at a local senior center.
Fri. June, 20 | If you’re curious about the impact the Cultural Trust is making in the Cultural District and across communities, check out our 2024 Annual Report—hot off the press!
Mon, June 16 | It was a magical day at the Benedum as 300 students from nine Pittsburgh-area schools took the stage for the Disney Musicals in Schools Student Share Celebration.
Mon., June 2 | For the first time, visitors will be able to explore the arts festival using sensory-friendly and tactile maps.
Wed., May 7 | Now in its third year, Beyond the Stage has evolved from a pilot program into a growing base of student volunteers. Vinay Thomas, who spearheaded the program, reflects on its growth and impact on students.
Mon, Feb. 3 | Whether you’re celebrating Valentine’s Day with a special someone, friends, or flying solo, the Cultural District is the perfect place to spend it.
Mon, Jan. 13 | Tess Dally helps us to kick off our newest blog series as she shares her experience with our accessible bars, platform seating, and more during her visit to see MJ the Musical at the Benedum.
Wed, Nov. 27 | Want more Broadway? Creative Conversations and Broadway Talk Backs allow you to explore the world of theater more closely.
Wed, Oct. 23 | Join us in honoring the rich traditions of Día de los Muertos and celebrating the memories of those who have touched our lives!
Fri, August 30 | Experiencing theater is special, so why not share it with the people who matter most?
Thurs, Aug 1, 2024 | Nine families experience the power of music to connect, inpsire, and express love.
Thurs, July, 18 2024 | We’re transforming the Giant Eagle Foundation Backyard into your new favorite hangout! From pickleball and fashion markets to live music, food, and games, here’s your guide to making the most of summer in Pittsburgh!
Fri, June 26, 2024 | The Three Rivers Arts Festival is more than an event- it's a beloved summer tradition that brings people together in unexpected ways.
Thurs, June 13, 2024 | Meet Ginny and learn how volunteerism changed her life.
As we prepare to bring our ten Broadway in Pitttsburgh shows to the Benedum Center, explore what makes each production sing on its own and harmonize as a collective.
Tuesday, Feb 6, 2024 | In celebration of Liberty Magic’s fifth anniversary, we’re traveling through time and taking a close-up look at the tricks and triumphs behind Pittsburgh’s home for magic.
Tuesday, Dec 12, 2023 | Give the gift of experiences this holiday season
Learn more about the multi-year process of bringing a new look to the Cultural District.
Ready to make some spring plans? We've compiled a list of some arts-related events in Pittsburgh that we think you will enjoy.
Vice President of Broadway Programming Marc Fleming pulls back the curtain on the 2023-2024 PNC Broadway in Pittsburgh Season.
Thursday, February 23 | The Pittsburgh Humanities Festival presented by Citizens has something for everyone.
Another Black History Month is upon us and we are back with another round up of ways to support Black art and artists in the Cultural District and beyond!
Wednesday, December 14 | With the holiday season in full swing, we’re here to help you find the perfect gifts while supporting local businesses in Downtown Pittsburgh.
Friday, Nov 11, 2022|The Pittsburgh arts scene has plenty to offer before and after Thanksgiving.
Wed, Oct 12, 2022 | Learn the ins and outs of sign language interpreting a PNC Broadway in Pittsburgh show.
Hadestown makes its way to the Benedum Center, November 15 - 20 as a part of the PNC Broadway in Pittsburgh series and we have another featured dining partner for you to enjoy before or after the show!
Mon, Apr 11, 2022 | Vice President of Broadway Programming Marc Fleming pulls back the curtain on the 2022-2023 PNC Broadway in Pittsburgh Season.
Tues, Oct. 22 | Our doors are always open to students! Learn how you can embrace your creative side and take a break from your usual school routine through affordable, conveninent, and fun arts experiences.
Wed, Oct. 16 | The Pittsburgh Cultural Trust and VaultArt Studios have joined forces to promote the inclusion of artists with disabilities in contemporary art.
Wed, Oct. 9 | Celebrate the fall season with a variety of free and low-cost events in the Cultural District.
Monday, Sept. 9 | For the first time, we presented the Pittsburgh Cultural Trust Icon Awards to three remarkable individuals who have made a lasting impact on our community.
Tues, September 3 | Prepare for your next visit to the theater with a few easy steps.
Thu, Mar 5, 2020 | Artists to Watch shines the spotlight on the incredibly talented artists who create right here in Pittsburgh!
Fri, Feb 14, 2020 | Pull back the curtain and learn more about the Benedum Center's one-of-a-kind stage and orchestra pit!
Mon, Feb 24, 2020 | Coming in early March: The Standard Market & Pint House (947 Penn), a one stop eatery that features health conscious but delicious bites.
Fri, Jan 10, 2020 | Learn how over 50,000 LED lights, an illuminated billboard and the skull of Nobel Prize nominee Claude Shannon are actually the untold emblems of Pittsburgh’s identity.
Wed, Dec 11, 2019 | Artists to Watch shines the spotlight on the incredibly talented artists who create right here in Pittsburgh!
Thu, Sep 12, 2019 | Learn about this Pittsburgh luminary's long career in show business.
Tue, Aug 20, 2019 | At the Byham Theater, a century-old artifact lives amid modern rigging, lighting and sound equipment. The theater's original fire curtain still hangs in the loft — only seeing the light of day once a year.
Fri, Jul 26, 2019 | From Gallery Crawl pop-ups to writer’s sanctuaries, there’s something special to be said about  Pittsburgh’s alleyways.