All of your Anthrocon questions and answers in one spot!
When is Anthrocon Pittsburgh?
Thursday, July 3 - Sunday, July 6, 2025
Where is Anthrocon Pittsburgh held?
Anthrocon is held at the David L. Lawrence Convention Center, 1000 Fort Duquesne Blvd, Pittsburgh, PA 15222.
How do I buy a ticket to Anthrocon?
Multiple registration options are available, ranging from Attending to Ultasponsor, as well as memberships for minors. You can register online here .
Is there a schedule of Anthrocon events?
Anthrocon weekend is full of exciting events and fun. There are panels, river cruises, dance competitions, a parade, a block party, stage performances, floor wars, and more. Click here to register to host an event or see a schedule.
Where can I find accessibility information for Anthrocon?
Anthrocon strives to create an inclusive and accessible space for all. The convention center offers a limited number of wheelchairs to rent , and American Sign Language interpreters are available at most events. For more information about accessibility or to make a request, click here .
Why should I attend Anthrocon Pittsburgh vs. a convention in another city?
Anthrocon is one of the world's largest and most well-established furry conventions, offering an unparalleled sense of community, creativity, and scale. Its unique bond with Pittsburgh sets it apart, as the city has warmly embraced the event for years, turning it into a citywide celebration. Enthusiastic locals and downtown businesses join in the fun, making Anthrocon feel like a homecoming for many in the community.
What have past attendees said about Anthrocon?
Past attendees often describe Anthrocon as an unforgettable experience of creativity and community. People love the welcoming atmosphere, event organization, and the city’s enthusiastic support. Here’s what some of them have said:
"The whole city gets involved with [Anthrocon], which gives it an atmosphere unique among all furry cons...AC is very focused on involving the city of Pittsburgh with the convention. They promote a more family-friendly image of the furry fandom and have a lot of events specifically for non-furry city residents to mingle with the furries."
"This was my first time visiting Pittsburgh, first time attending Anthrocon - and I will say this, it will not be my last. I LOVED every moment of Anthrocon."
"Compared to the Comic Con circuit, this con was definitely far less commercial and more focused on the community."