Policy Title
Naming Gifts Policy
Policy Owner
Vice President for University Advancement
Responsible Office
University Advancement
University Advancement
Contact Information
Questions concerning this policy or its intent should be directed to the Associate Vice President for Advancement Resources and Engagement Programs, Division of University Advancement; 412-268-2620.
Pertinent Dates
This policy was approved on August 18, 2016, and updated on July 1, 2017. Administrative changes were made in January 2022, March 2023, and September 2024.
Approved By
The President of Carnegie Mellon University.
Entities Affected By This Policy
Individuals, foundations, non-profit organizations, businesses/corporations, and other entities that make charitable contributions to the university
Individuals, foundations, non-profit organizations, businesses/corporations, and other entities that make charitable contributions to the university
Who Needs To Know About This Policy
This policy governs gift officers and other Carnegie Mellon University employees who interact directly with donors and prospective donors. This policy will also be relevant to donors and prospective donors as part of pertinent gift discussions, as well as management partners such as the President, Provost, deans, and other university leaders who play important roles in the university’s fundraising efforts.
This policy governs gift officers and other Carnegie Mellon University employees who interact directly with donors and prospective donors.
This policy will also be relevant to donors and prospective donors as part of pertinent gift discussions, as well as management partners such as the President, Provost, deans, and other university leaders who play important roles in the university’s fundraising efforts.
Definitions
Donor: An individual, foundation, non-profit organization, business/corporation, or other entity that makes a charitable contribution to the university. Charitable Contribution/Gift: A donation or gift to, or for the use of, a qualified charitable organization that is made voluntarily and without receiving, or expecting to receive, anything of value. Note: Carnegie Mellon University is qualified as a charitable organization under Section 501(c)(3) of the IRS Code. Reinvestment: An endowed fund status whereby all of the fund's income is reinvested in the fund's corpus. Distribution: An endowed fund status whereby a portion of the fund's income is distributed for spending, in accordance with the university's endowed-fund spending practices and policies as they are adopted and revised from time to time by the university's Board of Trustees.
Donor: An individual, foundation, non-profit organization, business/corporation, or other entity that makes a charitable contribution to the university.
Charitable Contribution/Gift: A donation or gift to, or for the use of, a qualified charitable organization that is made voluntarily and without receiving, or expecting to receive, anything of value. Note: Carnegie Mellon University is qualified as a charitable organization under Section 501(c)(3) of the IRS Code.
Reinvestment: An endowed fund status whereby all of the fund's income is reinvested in the fund's corpus.
Distribution: An endowed fund status whereby a portion of the fund's income is distributed for spending, in accordance with the university's endowed-fund spending practices and policies as they are adopted and revised from time to time by the university's Board of Trustees.
Forms / Instructions
n/a
Related Information
Reason for Policy / Purpose
The Naming Gifts Policy helps ensure that gifts with associated naming opportunities are managed in a consistent manner, and according to established university guidelines. It is also designed to provide donors with equitable, consistent, and appropriate recognition and stewardship for their generous support, leading to lasting and mutually beneficial relationships with the university. This policy applies to all naming gifts secured by the university, not just those managed by University Advancement.
The Naming Gifts Policy helps ensure that gifts with associated naming opportunities are managed in a consistent manner, and according to established university guidelines. It is also designed to provide donors with equitable, consistent, and appropriate recognition and stewardship for their generous support, leading to lasting and mutually beneficial relationships with the university. This policy applies to all naming gifts secured by the university, not just those managed by University Advancement.
Abstract
In recognition and appreciation of their generosity, donors who make certain types of charitable contributions to Carnegie Mellon University may be offered the opportunity to select the name of the program, facility, position, or entity being funded by their gifts. The policy outlines the types of gifts that may carry naming opportunities, and provides information related to the minimum amount required for specific naming gifts, name approval and duration, donor recognition, and other terms.
The policy outlines the types of gifts that may carry naming opportunities, and provides information related to the minimum amount required for specific naming gifts, name approval and duration, donor recognition, and other terms.