Policy Title
Alumni Relations Policy
Policy Owner
Vice President for University Advancement
Responsible Office
University Advancement, Alumni and Constituent Engagement
Contact Information
Questions concerning this policy or its intent should be directed to the Assistant Vice President for Alumni and Constituent Engagement in the Division of University Advancement, 412-268-2049.
Questions concerning this policy or its intent should be directed to the Assistant Vice President for Alumni and Constituent Engagement in the Division of University Advancement, 412-268-2049.
Pertinent Dates
This policy was approved on August 18, 2016. Administrative changes were made in October 2018, January 2022, and September 2024.
Approved By
The President of Carnegie Mellon University.
Entities Affected By This Policy
Carnegie Mellon faculty, staff, and alumni.
Who Needs To Know About This Policy
This policy governs Carnegie Mellon University employees engaged in activities related to university alumni.
This policy governs Carnegie Mellon University employees engaged in activities related to university alumni.
Definitions
n/a
Forms / Instructions
n/a
Related Information
Reason for Policy / Purpose
The Alumni Relations Policy helps to provide all university departments and units with consistent language and operating principles as they relate to alumni relations. It also provides structure for how university-recognized alumni and donor groups may be developed. This will help ensure efforts to engage alumni are efficient, are aligned with overall Advancement and university goals, and provide a uniform positive experience for alumni.
The Alumni Relations Policy helps to provide all university departments and units with consistent language and operating principles as they relate to alumni relations. It also provides structure for how university-recognized alumni and donor groups may be developed. This will help ensure efforts to engage alumni are efficient, are aligned with overall Advancement and university goals, and provide a uniform positive experience for alumni.
Abstract
This policy defines alumni status and outlines requirements associated with Carnegie Mellon University Alumni Association membership, alumni awards and honors, alumni communications and surveys, alumni volunteer networks, donor recognition societies, and reunions.
This policy defines alumni status and outlines requirements associated with Carnegie Mellon University Alumni Association membership, alumni awards and honors, alumni communications and surveys, alumni volunteer networks, donor recognition societies, and reunions.