ARCHIVED TOPIC: This topic was archived on Oct. 16, 2020 and will no longer be updated.
Ronald Reagan served as the 40th President of the United States from Jan. 20, 1981, to Jan. 19, 1989. He won the 1980 presidential election , beating Democratic incumbent Jimmy Carter with 50.7% of the votes and won his second term by a landslide of 58.8% of the votes. [2] [49]
Reagan’s proponents point to his accomplishments, including stimulating economic growth, strengthening national defense, revitalizing the Republican Party , and ending the global Cold War , as evidence of his good presidency.
His opponents contend that Reagan’s poor policies, such as bloating the national defense, drastically cutting social services, and making illegal arms-for-hostages deals led the country into record deficits and global embarrassment.
Ronald Wilson Reagan was born on Feb. 6, 1911, in Tampico , Illinois. He graduated in 1932 from Eureka College with a BA in social sciences and economics and moved to Iowa to become a radio sports announcer. A screen test in 1937 won him a contract in Hollywood and, over two decades, he appeared in 53 films. In 1949 Ronald Reagan divorced his first wife, Jane Wyman , and married Nancy Davis in 1952. He was then the only president to have been divorced. After six years as president of the Screen Actors Guild, serving intermittently between 1947 and 1960, Reagan was elected governor of California on Nov. 5, 1966, and reelected on Nov. 5, 1970. [2] [
At the age of 69 in 1981 and 73 in 1985, Reagan was then the oldest man ever elected president. [1]
On Mar. 30, 1981, 69 days after Reagan’s inauguration on Jan. 20, John Hinckley, Jr. attempted to assassinate the president outside the Washington Hilton hotel. Reagan was shot under the left arm, the bullet lodged in his lung, and missed his heart by less than an inch.  The 25-year-old Hinckley’s assassination attempt stemmed from his obsession with actress Jodie Foster and the movie Taxi Driver in which Foster played a role. Hinckley believed an “historical deed,” such as assassinating the president, would impress the actress. Hinckley’s trial in 1982 ended in a not-guilty verdict by reason of insanity. [2]
When Ronald Reagan took office the US economy had 9% inflation with 20% interest rates. [50] To combat these effects Reagan established what came to be known as “ Reaganomics ,” economic policies that included increased defense spending, lower personal income taxes, reduced spending on social services, and decreased business regulation. [51]
The President and his cabinet emphasized supply-side economics, believing that slashing taxes will stimulate economic growth. They passed legislation such as the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981, which included the largest tax cuts in the postwar period, the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982, and the Tax Reform Act of 1986. As a result, the top marginal tax rate on individual income was reduced from 70% to 28% and the overall tax code was restructured. [37] [52]
Some 13,000 members of the Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization (PATCO) walked off the job in a nationwide strike on Aug. 3, 1981. Two days later, Reagan announced that they were in violation of legislation prohibiting strikes by government employees because of public safety and, if they did not report to work within 48 hours, their jobs would be terminated. Only 1,300 returned to their jobs. [42] It was an event that changed the landscape of US labor relations – major strikes plummeted from an average of 300 each year in the decades before to fewer than 30 in 2006. [20]
On Aug. 19, 1981, Ronald Reagan fulfilled his campaign pledge to appoint the first woman to the Supreme Court by nominating Sandra Day O’Connor to replace Justice Potter Stewart . Congress confirmed O’Connor’s appointment on Sept. 21, 1981 by a vote of 99-0. [3]
In the fall of 1981, the US economy took a turn for the worse, experiencing its worst recession since the Great Depression . The Federal Reserve increased interest rates to combat the 14% inflation rate. By Nov. 1982, unemployment reached 10.8%, thousands of businesses failed, farmers lost their land, and many sick, elderly, and poor became homeless. [2] The official unemployment rate reached 11.5 million in Jan. 1983, and Reagan’s disapproval rating rose to 50%, from a low of 18% in early 1981. [53] [54]
On March 8, 1983, Reagan gave what came to be known as his “Evil Empire Speech,” that warned against ignoring “the aggressive impulses of an evil empire,” the Soviet Union . [55] That same month, on March 23, President Reagan announced the creation of the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), nicknamed “Star Wars,” a space-based defense system intended to deter an attack on the US by intercepting Soviet nuclear intercontinental ballistic missiles ( ICBMs ). [56]
In Beirut , Lebanon, on Oct. 23, 1983, a suicide bomber drove his truck into a US Marine barracks, killing 241 Marines. This tragedy caused the US to reconsider Reagan’s placement of the Marines as peacekeepers of a cease-fire during the Lebanese civil war. US troops left Lebanon in Feb. 1984. [57] In that same month, on Oct. 25, 1,900 US Marines invaded the small island nation of Grenada. The invasion was partly over safety concerns for American medical students in the country and partly to weaken a recent Marxist coup; it emphasized Reagan’s drive to undermine any spread of communism. The move was both denounced by the United Nations and supported by many Americans. [6] [58] The US accomplished its military objectives in Grenada : the students came home unharmed and the Marxist government was deposed. [2]
Reagan won a second term in 1984 by a landslide, receiving 58.8% of the popular vote. He also won a record 525 of a possible 538 electoral college votes, the highest in US history (as of Oct. 11, 2010). Reagan won every state but Minnesota, the home state of his opponent Walter Mondale . [49]
Between Nov. 19, 1985, and Dec. 8, 1987, President Reagan met with Mikhail Gorbachev, Secretary General of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, at four summits to discuss their countries’ bilateral arms race. The meetings culminated in their Dec. 8, 1987 signing of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty, a bilateral treaty which required the elimination of all intermediate range ground-launched missiles. [2] [59] [66]
On Nov. 25, 1986, Attorney General Edwin Meese publicly confirmed that $10-$30 million of profits from the sale of US arms to Iran had been diverted to the anti-communist guerrilla Nicaraguan Contras. National Security Adviser John Poindexter resigned and National Security Aide Col. Oliver North was fired, both for their involvement in what came to be known as the “ Iran-Contra” affair . President Reagan claimed that he did not learn of the Iran-Contra diversion until Meese told him about it on Nov. 24, 1986. [63] The Feb. 26, 1987, Tower Commission’s Report, a study by an independent commission appointed by Reagan, found no evidence linking Reagan to the fund diversion. However, the report did determine that Reagan’s disengagement from the management of the White House led to the actions of his administration. [2]
On June 12, 1987, Reagan delivered a famous address in West Berlin at the Brandenburg Gate which had separated communist East Berlin from democratic West Berlin since 1961. In his speech, the president questioned whether reforms in the Soviet Union were profound or “token gestures,” and challenged Gorbachev to prove his efforts at openness: “General Secretary Gorbachev , if you seek peace, if you seek prosperity for the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, if you seek liberalization: Come here to this gate! Mr. Gorbachev, open this gate! Mr. Gorbachev, tear down this wall!” [15]
In his two terms in office, Reagan continually tried to balance the budget by cutting federal spending. He cut the budgets of many federal departments, including the Department of Housing and Urban Development (by 40%), the Department of Transportation (by 18%), the Department of Education (by 19%), the Department of Commerce (by 32%), and the Department of Agriculture (by 24%). Reagan never cut the budgets for the Departments of Defense, Health and Human Services, Justice, or State. [4]
President Reagan also presided over the biggest peacetime defense buildup in history. Reagan expanded defense spending from $178 billion in 1981 to $283 billion by 1988, an increase of 58.9%. [5]
During Reagan’s presidency, total national debt increased from $994 billion in 1981 to $2.9 trillion in 1988. [36] The deficit grew from $74 billion in 1980 to $155 billion in 1988, and unemployment was at a 14-year low, 5.5%, by mid-1988. [60] [2] On Jan. 20, 1989, Ronald Reagan left the White House with the highest approval rating, 68%, of any president since Franklin D. Roosevelt. [61]
In 1993, Reagan experienced recurring episodes of confusion and forgetfulness and was diagnosed as having Alzheimer Disease e. He disclosed his condition in a Nov. 5, 1994 letter to the American people hoping to “promote greater awareness of this condition.” [62] Ronald Reagan died in California on June 5, 2004 at the age of 93. [2]
Pro 1: Character
Reagan’s charm, geniality, and ability to connect with average citizens as well as world leaders earned him the nickname “The Great Communicator.” Through his speeches and actions, Reagan restored the confidence of the American public in the office of the president. Decades after he left office, Reagan’s legacy remained strong with admirers wanting to add his portrait to Mount Rushmore and to US currency. [6]
Pro 2: Crime
On Oct. 2 1982, Reagan launched a “War on Drugs” that helped reduce the high rate of casual drug use lingering from the 1970s. [7] He increased funding for the drug war from $1.5 billion in 1981 to $2.75 billion in 1986. [8] Reagan also signed eight major Executive Orders related to crime and justice as well as five major crime bills: Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984, Sentencing Reform Act of 1984, National Narcotics Leadership Act of 1984, Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986, and Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988. [9]
Pro 3: Defense
Reagan strengthened the weak, ineffectual, and vulnerable military which Carter left behind. The Reagan administration funded research and development of weapons systems, including stealth technology and precision weaponry, later used in both Persian Gulf wars. Reagan’s largest peacetime defense buildup in history, which included larger training ranges and military pay increases, helped invigorate the American military from its Vietnam War-era despondency. [10]
Pro 4: Economy
Reagan’s economic policies, such as a reduction in government spending and regulation and cuts in taxes, resulted in an unprecedented 92-month long economic boom, from Nov. 1982 to July 1990, with expansion and growth in the GDP (+36%), employment (+20 million jobs), and the Dow Jones Industrial Average (+15%). [11]
Pro 5: Education
After “A Nation at Risk”, a negative report on the nation’s educational system, was released in Apr. 1983, President Reagan increased the budget for the Department of Education by $6 billion over the next three years.[12] During the Reagan Administration, state education aid increased 20%, or almost $35 billion and, in 1988, it comprised a nearly 50% slice of revenue from all sources for education. [13]
Pro 6: Environment
Between 1982 and 1988, Reagan signed 43 bills designating more than 10 million acres of federal wilderness areas in 27 states. This acreage accounted for nearly 10% of the National Wilderness Preservation System at the time. Reagan had signed more wilderness bills than any other president since the Wilderness Act was enacted in 1964. [14]
Pro 7: Foreign Policy
Reagan helped bring an end to the 46-year-old Cold War, through a combination of hostile, anti-communist rhetoric and a massive arms buildup followed by skillful diplomacy and disarmament. On Nov. 9, 1989, just over two years after his famous Brandenburg Gate speech, the Berlin Wall fell, marking the end of communism in Germany. [15] On Dec. 15, 1991, after four bilateral summits with Reagan, General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev dissolved the Soviet Union. [2] [16]
Pro 8: Health
On Apr. 7, 1986, Reagan signed the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA) into law. As of Sep. 30, 2010, COBRA is still in effect and gives some workers who lose their health benefits, for example in situations such as job loss or reduction in hours worked, the right to choose to continue health benefits provided by their employer’s group health plan. [17]
Pro 9: Labor
When Reagan followed through on his Aug. 3, 1981 threat to fire 12,176 striking air traffic controllers (PATCO), he held the controllers to their signed affidavit stating that they would not “participate [in any strike] while an employee of the Government of the United States.” [18] Reagan brought in military air traffic controllers as replacements to ensure there was no disruption of a major public service. [19] His actions helped curtail future frivolous strikes as they plummeted from an average of 300 each year in the decades before the PATCO strike to fewer than 30 in 2006. [20]
Pro 10: Science and Technology:
Reagan was a big supporter of the National Aeronautics & Space Administration (NASA). In his 1984 State of the Union Address, Reagan announced plans for what came to be the International Space Station. [64] On Jan. 30, 1987, Reagan also announced that he planned to fund the building of the Superconducting Super Collider, a $4.5 billion dollar particle accelerator used for high energy physics research. [21] [22]
Pro 11: Social Policy
To “finally break the poverty trap,” as Reagan stated in his 1987 State of the Union Address, he signed the Family Support Act on Oct. 12, 1988. [5] The Act required states to establish and operate a Job Opportunities and Basic Skills program (JOBS) to assure needy families with children3obtain the training and employment necessary to avoid long-term welfare. [23] Reagan also helped save Social Security by passing the Social Security Reform Act of 1983. It provided extra revenue dedicated to securing the solvent future of Social Security. [24]
Pro 12: Taxes
Through massive tax cuts, Reagan helped restore an economy that had both high inflation and unemployment left over from the 1970s. As he brought taxation down from 70% to 28%, Reagan proved that reducing excessive tax rates stimulates growth, increases economic activity, and boosts tax revenues. Government revenues from income tax rose from $244 billion in 1980 to $446 billion in 1989. [25]
Pro 13: Other
Reagan helped to reduce inefficiencies in the federal bureaucracy. When Reagan took office, it took seven weeks to get a Social Security card and 43 days to get a passport. By the time he left office, both could be had in 10 days. [26]
Pro Quotes
Dr. Lee Edwards, Distinguished Fellow in Conservative Thought at the Heritage Foundation, in an Apr. 29, 2016, article for the Daily Signal titled “Sorry, Hollywood: Reagan’s Second Term Was Incredibly Successful,” wrote:
“There is also the remarkable Reagan record of the second term that includes his three summits with Mikhail Gorbachev that produced the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty and set in motion the forces that ended the Cold War without a shot, in Margaret Thatcher’s memorable phrase; his dramatic challenge at the Brandenberg Gate ‘to tear down this wall!’ which came tumbling down some 18 months later; his 1986 tax reform that lowered the top marginal rate from 50 percent to 33 percent, simplified the number of tax brackets, and eliminated hundreds of special interest provisions such as the ‘three martini’ lunch; his leaving office with a final approval rating of 63 percent, the highest of any president to that point …
‘We the people,’ said Reagan, ‘tell the government what to do, it doesn’t tell us.’ The idea of ‘we the people,’ he explained, was the underlying basis for everything he had tried to do as president.
And then, having restored Americans’ confidence in themselves and their future, having ignited an unprecedented period of prosperity with his economic reforms, and having ended the Cold War with a treaty and not a nuclear holocaust, he went home, having done his duty and served his country as few presidents have in our history.”
— Apr. 29, 2016
Ben T. Elliott, Director of White House Speechwriting under President Ronald Reagan, in a June 5, 2015, article for National Review titled “Why Ronald Reagan’s Example Is Still Relevant for America Today,” wrote:
“[Reagan] transformed a sputtering U.S. economy into a rocket of growth that led to a generation of prosperity. He restored a neglected U.S. military and its alliances, engineering the eventual defeat of the Soviet empire, without starting a war and without firing a shot. Through it all, he revived America’s spirit, restored our hopes, and strengthened our faith …
[H]e cut taxes deeply and equally for everyone, eventually dropping the top rate all the way from 70 percent to 28 percent, while providing enterprises strong incentives to compete and restoring a dollar as good as gold. He fought hard against ever expanding, encroaching bureaucracy, reduced non-defense spending, and eliminated subsidies and price controls… A strong dollar slew double-digit inflation and restored confidence. Lower tax rates encouraged women to enter the workforce in large numbers, many of them starting up new businesses, while minority employment and enterprises also grew. The rising tide of growth gave birth to new industries, propelling America’s technology boom in the 1990s. In short, the American people unleashed the most powerful postwar recovery in history, reducing poverty, raising incomes, and creating a prosperity that benefited every income group, rejuvenated our communities, and lifted up the entire global economy.”
— June 5, 2015
Glenn Beck, radio host and political commentator, in a June 14, 2016 series on the life of Ronald Reagan, a transcript of which is available on his website under the title “Ronald Reagan: The Five-Part Series,” stated:
“They said Reagan was too simple to become a great president, but that’s what we loved about him. He was like our father or our grandfather.… Reagan inspired us to believe in the power of the individual, in the small business owner, in the strength of our military and the humility of those who live it …
During his administration, the nation added over 16 million jobs. He cut the tax rate across-the-board, including the top rate from a ridiculous 70 percent income tax to 28. His policies lowered the inflation rate from 13.5 percent in 1980, to 1.9 in 1986. Real GDP growth under Reagan averaged 3.5 percent, and it was nearly 5 percent following the recession …
[T]hanks in large part to his heroic efforts rebuilding the United States military, opposing communism at every turn, remaining steadfast, not to mention his Star Wars defensive system… the [Berlin] wall began coming down on November 9th, 1989, just over two years after the [Brandenburg Gate] speech. The Soviet Union, the evil empire, collapsed.”
— June 14, 2016
UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, as stated in her June 11, 2004, “Eulogy for President Reagan”:
“We have lost a great president, a great American, and a great man, and I have lost a dear friend.
In his lifetime, Ronald Reagan was such a cheerful and invigorating presence that it was easy to forget what daunting historic tasks he set himself. He sought to mend America’s wounded spirit, to restore the strength of the free world, and to free the slaves of communism… His policies had a freshness and optimism that won converts from every class and every nation, and ultimately, from the very heart of the ‘evil empire.’
He won the Cold War, not only without firing a shot, but also by inviting enemies out of their fortress and turning them into friends.”
— June 11, 2004
William F. Buckley Jr., founder and former editor-at-large of National Review , in a Mar.-Apr. 1997 Policy Review article titled “‘There You Go Again’: Liberal Historians and the ‘New York Times’ Deny Ronald Reagan His Due” by Alvin Felzenberg:
“Reagan had the best intuitive sense of priorities of any president in the postwar period, when it became a constant struggle to know what to pay attention to. His designation of the Soviet Union as an ‘evil empire’ froze the blood of international diplomacy, but agitated the moral imagination and did more to advance U.S. national objectives than a year’s Pentagon spending. Speaking of which, Reagan was exactly correct in knowing that the resources of the U.S. could not be matched by those of the enemy. His willingness to install theater weapons in Europe, to explore anti-missile technology, and to commit great sums to defense effectively disarmed the potential aggressor. And then who, more resonantly than he, made the case against Big Government? Could he have known that a Democratic president, seven years after Reagan left office, would serve as an echo chamber on the matter of an end to Big Government?
Reagan belongs on Mount Rushmore, and he’ll be there, after the carpers die off.”
— Mar.-Apr. 1997
Peggy Noonan, author and former Special Assistant and Speechwriter for President Reagan, wrote in a June 5, 2004, article titled “As President, Reagan Was a Giant” on msnbc.com:
“Ronald Reagan was a great communicator not because he said things in an unusual way but because he said great things – things that were true and needed saying. Those on the left in his day always thought Reagan had some magical way of expressing himself. He didn’t. It was what he said that was important, not how he said it…
Reagan brought a constellation of virtues to the office of the presidency – guts, compassion, humor, a lack of pretension, a willingness to face the world and tell the truth, a willingness to make decisions and stand by them – and his leadership changed the world, and for the better. As president, he was a giant.”
— June 5, 2004
George H. Nash, Senior Fellow at the Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal, in a Mar.-Apr. 1997 Policy Review article titled “‘There You Go Again’: Liberal Historians and the ‘New York Times’ Deny Ronald Reagan His Due” by Alvin Felzenberg:
“As the 1980s recede into history, three achievements of Ronald Reagan loom larger. In a time of dangerous drift and malaise, he restored Americans’ sense of self-confidence and greatness. He transmuted American conservatism from theory to practice, undermined the intellectual pretensions of long-regnant liberalism, and decisively shifted the paradigm of political discourse for the rest of the 20th century. Above all, he mobilized the resources — rhetorical, military, and diplomatic — that put Soviet communism on the road to extinction. As time passes, Reagan’s stature rises — a sure sign that he will be remembered as one of our most successful and important presidents.”
— Mar.-Apr. 1997
John P. Diggins, former Distinguished Professor of the Graduate Center of History at the City University of New York (CUNY), in his 2007 book Ronald Reagan: Fate, Freedom, and the Making of History:
“My belated respect for [Reagan] grew from appreciating his boldness in dealing with the three miseries of the modern era – one terrifying, the other crippling, the third inhibiting.
The first abomination was a suicidal nuclear arms race of such potential massive destruction that it threatened the world with extinction; the second, an expanding welfare state that had made the poor helplessly dependent, reduced them to debilitating objects of pity, and destroyed any hope for self-esteem; the third, a joyless religious inheritance that told people their kingdom was not of this world and they needed to be careful about pursuing happiness in case they came to enjoy it. Reagan, it is now clear, delivered America from fear and loathing. He stood for freedom, peace, disarmament, self-reliance, eartlhy happiness, the dreams of the imagination and the desires of the heart.”
— 2007
John P. Diggins, former Distinguished Professor of the Graduate Center of History at the City University of New York (CUNY), in his 2007 book Ronald Reagan: Fate, Freedom, and the Making of History:
“My belated respect for [Reagan] grew from appreciating his boldness in dealing with the three miseries of the modern era – one terrifying, the other crippling, the third inhibiting.
The first abomination was a suicidal nuclear arms race of such potential massive destruction that it threatened the world with extinction; the second, an expanding welfare state that had made the poor helplessly dependent, reduced them to debilitating objects of pity, and destroyed any hope for self-esteem; the third, a joyless religious inheritance that told people their kingdom was not of this world and they needed to be careful about pursuing happiness in case they came to enjoy it. Reagan, it is now clear, delivered America from fear and loathing. He stood for freedom, peace, disarmament, self-reliance, eartlhy happiness, the dreams of the imagination and the desires of the heart.”
— 2007
Richard Reeves, Senior Lecturer at the University of Southern California’s Annenberg School of Communication, in the 2003 book The Politics Presidents Make: Leadership from John Adams to Bill Clinton by Stephen Skowronek:
“Reagan had come into the oval office at a time when the man in it … was declaring political bankruptcy and important voices outside it, in the press and the academy, were decrying the end of leadership. They were wrong. The new President made the system work….The leader was an extraordinary man.”
— 2003
Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, former US Permanent Representative to the United Nations, in a Mar.-Apr. 1997 Policy Review article titled “‘There You Go Again’: Liberal Historians and the ‘New York Times’ Deny Ronald Reagan His Due” by Alvin Felzenberg:
“Nothing but liberal prejudice can prevent some distinguished Democrats (which most historians are) from discerning the extraordinary achievements of Ronald Reagan. I mention just two: his crucial role in rebuilding American and Western military strength after a period of Western decline and Soviet expansion, and his great success in demonstrating the superiority of free markets and free societies over socialism — especially, but not only, Marxist socialism. His leadership in these achievements strengthened peace and expanded freedom.
This is a president whose deliberate policies produced seven years of economic growth…after Democratic economists said that was impossible.”
— Mar.-Apr. 1997
Jack Wheeler, editor-in-chief of To the Point , wrote in a June 8, 2004, Washington Times article titled “The ‘Great-Souled Man’; Reagan Was a Classic”:
“Five years ago, in February 1999, I wrote the following tribute to this extraordinary man.
‘This coming Sunday, Feb. 6, will be the 88th birthday of the greatest president of the 20th century: Ronald Reagan. That Reagan’s achievements exceed those of any president since Washington and Jefferson will unquestionably be the judgment of future historians …
[H]e was an extraordinarily loveable, likeable, good and decent human being, a man whom Aristotle would have said possessed a ‘great soul.’ Take the time this Sunday to reflect on the achievements of Ronald Reagan, on how much you and all Americans owe him a debt of thankfulness and gratitude.
America was truly blessed to have a man such as him to come to her rescue and to raise her from despairing depths to the pinnacle of historic success we all stand upon today.’”
— June 8, 2004
Con 1: Character
Reagan’s hands-off leadership style manifested into an inability to control his administration from potentially illegal activities, e.g. the “Iran-Contra” scandal. [27] His “troika,” the nickname given to Chief of Staff James Baker, Deputy Chief of Staff Michael Deaver, and Counselor Edwin Meese, made many of Reagan’s key administrative decisions for him. [28]
Con 2: Crime
In a Sept. 28, 1981, speech to the International Chiefs of Police, Reagan claimed that people who commit violent crimes “are not desperate people seeking bread for their families; crime is the way they’ve chosen to live.” [30] This attitude failed to address the stark realities underlying crime, namely the national culture of poverty and discrimination. Violent crime nationwide increased 21% from 1981-1989. [31] The “War on Drugs” wasted billions of dollars and escalated drug-related crime. [32] [33]
Con 3: Defense
Reagan increased the defense budget for an unprecedented six consecutive years. This spending produced an unsustainable bubble in the defense industry that led to decades of restructuring. By the early 1990s the defense industry had too many factories and too many workers to support with its smaller budgets. For example, in the early 1980s there were 50 large defense suppliers to the US government. By 2004 there were five. [34] [35]
Con 4: Economy
Reagan pledged during his 1980 campaign for president to balance the federal budget, but never submitted a balanced budget in his eight years in office. In 1981, the deficit was $79 billion and, in 1986, at the peak of his deficit spending, it stood at $221 billion. The federal debt was $994 billion when he took office in 1981 and grew to $2.9 trillion when his second term ended in 1989. [36] Reagan also added more trade barriers than any other president since Hoover in 1930. US imports that were subject to some form of trade restraint increased from 12% in 1980 to 23% in 1988. [37]
Con 5: Education
In his two terms in office, Reagan slashed federal aid to schools by more than $1 billion, and he cut the Department of Education budget by 19%. [4] One of Reagan’s campaign promises was to abolish the Department of Education, which he considered a “bureaucratic boondoggle.” After intermittent attempts to fulfill this promise, he gave up in 1983 due to lack of Congressional support. [38]
Con 6: Environment
As a president who said “trees cause more pollution than automobiles do,” Reagan issued leases for oil, gas, and coal development on tens of millions of acres of national lands. Reagan’s appointee to the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Anne Gorsuch, tried to gut the 1972 Clean Water Act, cut EPA funding by 25%, and mismanaged a $1.6 billion program to clean up hazardous waste dumps. [39] [40]
Con 7: Foreign Policy
Reagan broke his own vows not to make deals with terrorists or states that aided them. In the “Iran-Contra” scandal, Reagan’s administration bypassed congressional restrictions on aiding Nicaragua’s Contra guerilla fighters, in part by diverting money to them from the sale of missiles to Iran. [27] Reagan also initiated military involvement in Libya, Grenada, El Salvador, Nicaragua, and Lebanon. [6]
Con 8: Health
Reagan almost completely ignored the growing AIDS epidemic. Although the first case of AIDS was discovered in the early 1980s, Reagan never publicly addressed the epidemic until May 31, 1987 when he spoke at an AIDS conference in Washington, DC. By that time, 36,058 Americans had been diagnosed with the disease and 20,849 had died. [41]
Con 9: Labor
On Aug. 3, 1981, Reagan ordered 12,176 striking air traffic controllers (PATCO) back to their jobs, disregarding the workers’ complaints of stress, staff shortages, and outdated equipment. PATCO was one of the few unions that had endorsed Reagan in the 1980 election. Reagan repaid them by giving them only 48 hours to cancel the strike and banning them from federal service for life. The ban was not lifted until 1993 by President Bill Clinton. [42]
Con 10: Science and Technology:
Reagan’s over-ambitious space-based laser strategic defensive system, the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) or “Star Wars,” proved to be too technically complex and expensive to complete. [26] From its inception in 1983 to its demise in 1993, the program cost taxpayers $33 billion dollars. [43]
Con 11: Social Policy
Reagan believed that widespread freeloading plagued welfare and social programs. As Reagan slashed spending in his first term on programs such as food stamps and subsidized housing, the poverty rate climbed from 12% to 15% and unemployment rose from 7% to 11%. [44]
Con 12: Taxes
Reagan’s “voodoo” economic policy, where tax cuts were believed to somehow generate tax revenues, failed to account for his administration’s excessive spending which increased from $591 billion in 1980 to $1.2 trillion in 1990. [45] [46] Reagan both increased and cut taxes. In 1980, middle-income families with children paid 8.2% in income taxes and 9.5% in payroll taxes. By 1988 their income tax was down to 6.6%, but payroll tax was up to 11.8%, a combined increase in taxes. [24] Reagan pushed through Social Security tax increases of $165 billion over seven years. [47]
Con 13: Other
Reagan opposed many important civil rights measures that further alienated him and the Republican Party from African-Americans. On Mar. 16, 1988, Reagan vetoed the Civil Rights Restoration Act. He was opposed to extending provisions of the 1965 Voting Rights Act. He initially opposed making Martin Luther King, Jr.’s birthday a national holiday. He was also loyal to apartheid South Africa, considering that country a friend and ally. [2] [48]