Table of Contents Ask the Chatbot
Animal testing is used to develop medical treatments, determine the toxicity of medicine, check the safety of products destined for human use, and for other biomedical, commercial, and healthcare reasons. Research on living animals has been practiced since at least 500 BC. [2]
What do you think?
Explore the ProCon debate
Early History
Descriptions of the dissection of live animals have been found in ancient Greek writings from as early as circa 500 BC. Physician-scientists such as Aristotle , Herophilus , and Erasistratus performed the experiments to discover the functions of living organisms. Vivisection (dissection of a living organism) was practiced on human criminals in Alexandria and in ancient Rome , but ancient prohibitions and taboos against the mutilation of the human body led to a reliance on animal subjects. Aristotle believed that animals lacked intelligence, and so the notions of justice and injustice did not apply to them. Theophrastus , a successor to Aristotle, disagreed, objecting to the vivisection of animals on the grounds that, like humans, they can feel pain , and causing pain to animals was an affront to the gods. [79] [80]
Roman physician and philosopher Galen (130–200 AD), whose theories of medicine were influential throughout Europe for 15 centuries, engaged in the public dissection of animals (including an elephant ), which was a popular form of entertainment at the time. Galen also engaged in animal vivisection in order to develop theories on human anatomy , physiology , pathology , and pharmacology . In one of his experiments, he demonstrated that arteries , which were believed by earlier physicians to contain air, actually contained blood . Galen believed that animal physiology was very similar to that of human beings, but despite this similarity he had little sympathy for the animals on which he experimented. Galen recommended that his students vivisect animals “without pity or compassion” and warned that the “unpleasing expression of the ape when it is being vivisected” was to be expected. [80] [81] [82]
French philosopher René Descartes (1596–1650), who occasionally experimented on live animals, including at least one rabbit , as well as eels and fish , believed that animals were “automata” who could not experience pain or suffer the way that humans do. Descartes recognized that animals could feel, but because they could not think, he argued, they were unable to consciously experience those feelings. [66] [83]
English physician William Harvey (1578–1657) discovered that the heart , and not the lungs , circulated blood throughout the body as a result of his experiments on living animals. [84] [85]
Animal Testing (1800s through mid-1900s)
There was little public objection to animal experimentation until the 19th century, when the increased adoption of domestic pets fueled interest in an anti-vivisection movement, primarily in England. This trend culminated in the founding of the Society for the Protection of Animals Liable to Vivisection in 1875, followed by the formation of similar groups. [79] [87]
One of the first proponents of animal testing to respond to the growing anti-testing movement was French physiologist Claude Bernard in his Introduction to the Study of Experimental Medicine (1865). Bernard argued that experimenting on animals was ethical because of the benefits to medicine and the extension of human life. [79]
Queen Victoria was an early opponent of animal testing in England, according to a letter written by her private secretary in 1875: “The Queen has been dreadfully shocked at the details of some of these [animal research] practices, and is most anxious to put a stop to them.” Soon the anti-vivisection campaign became strong enough to pressure lawmakers into establishing the world’s first law regulating the use of live animals in scientific research: Great Britain’s Cruelty to Animals Act of 1876. [15] [88]
Russian physiologist Ivan Pavlov (1849–1936) demonstrated the “conditioned reflex” by training dogs to salivate upon hearing the sound of a bell or electric buzzer. In order to measure “the intensity of the salivary reflex,” wrote Pavlov, the dogs were subjected to a “minor operation, which consists in the transplantation of the opening of the salivary duct from its natural place on the mucous membrane of the mouth to the outside skin.” A “small glass funnel” was then attached to the salivary duct opening with a “special cement.” [75] [86]
In The Principles of Humane Experimental Technique (1959), zoologist William Russell and microbiologist Rex Burch established the “Three Rs” of humane experimentation: Replacement (replacing the use of animals with alternative research methods), Reduction (minimizing the use of animals whenever possible), and Refinement (reducing suffering and improving animals’ living conditions). The “Three Rs” were incorporated into the United States’ federal Animal Welfare Act (AWA) of 1966 and formed the basis of many international animal welfare laws. [89] [90] [91]
Animals in Space and the Military
Since as early as 1948, animals have been used by the U.S. space program for testing such aspects of space travel as the effects of prolonged weightlessness. After several monkeys died in unmanned space flights in the 1940s, the first monkey to survive a space flight was Yorick, recovered from an Aerobee missile flight on September 20, 1951. However, Yorick died several hours after landing, possibly due to heat stress. The first living creature to orbit Earth was Laika , a stray dog sent into space on the Soviet spacecraft Sputnik 2 on November 3, 1957. Laika died of “overheating and panic” early in the mission, according to the BBC . The record for the most animals sent into space was set April 17, 1998, when more than 2,000 animals, including rats , mice , fish , crickets , and snails , were launched into space on the shuttle Columbia (along with the seven-member human crew) for neurological testing. [7] [8] [92] [116]
Since the Vietnam War , animals have also been used by the U.S. military. The U.S. Department of Defense , for example, used 488,237 animals for research and combat trauma training (“live tissue training”) in fiscal year 2007, which included subjecting anesthetized goats and pigs to gunshot wounds, burns, and amputations for the training of military medics. In February 2013, after an escalation of opposition by animal rights groups such as People for the Ethical Treatments of Animals (PETA) , Congress ordered the Pentagon to present a written plan to phase out live tissue training. The U.S. Coast Guard , however, which was at the center of a 2012 scandal involving videotaped footage of goats being mutilated as part of its live tissue training program, said in May 2013 that the program will continue. [6] [93] [94] [95]
The Modern Anti-Testing Movement
In Animal Liberation: A New Ethics for Our Treatment of Animals (1975), Australian philosopher Peter Singer galvanized the animal rights and anti-testing movements by popularizing the notion of “ speciesism ”—the belief that some species should be treated as more important than other species—as something akin to racism , sexism , and other forms of prejudice . Addressing animal testing specifically, Singer predicted that “one day . . . our children’s children, reading about what was done in laboratories in the twentieth century, will feel the same sense of horror and incredulity . . . that we now feel when we read about the atrocities of the Roman gladiatorial arenas or the eighteenth-century slave trade.” [66]
In 1981, an early victory by then-fledgling animal rights group PETA served to revitalize the anti-testing movement. A PETA activist working undercover at the Institute for Biological Research in Silver Spring , Maryland, took photographs of monkeys in the facility that had engaged in self-mutilation due to stress. The laboratory’s director, Edward Taub, was charged with more than a dozen animal cruelty offenses, and an especially notorious photo of a monkey in a harness with all four limbs restrained became a symbolic image for the animal rights movement. [96]
In 2001, controversy erupted over animal experiments undertaken by a veterinarian at Ohio State University . Dr. Michael Podell infected cats with the feline AIDS virus in order to study why methamphetamine users deteriorate more quickly from the symptoms of AIDS . After receiving several death threats, Dr. Podell abandoned his academic career. Over 60 percent of biomedical scientists polled by Nature magazine say “animal-rights activists present a real threat to essential biomedical research.” [35] [97]
Global Bans on Animal Testing
A 2007 report by the National Research Council of the National Academy of Sciences called for a reduction in the use of animal testing, recommending instead the increased use of in vitro methods (tests done on human cells or tissue in a petri dish) using human cells. Though the report touted new technologies that could eventually eliminate the need for animal testing altogether, the authors acknowledged that “For the foreseeable future … targeted tests in animals would need to be used to complement the in vitro tests, because current methods cannot yet adequately mirror the metabolism of a whole animal.” [104]
In March 2013, the European Union banned the import and sale of cosmetic products that use ingredients tested on animals (after 2004 and 2009 bans on cosmetics animal testing on domestic products). Some proponents of animal testing objected, arguing that some animal tests had no non-animal equivalents. A spokesman for the trade association Cosmetics Europe stated it is likely “that consumers in Europe won’t have access to new products because we can’t ensure that some ingredients will be safe without access to suitable and adequate testing.” India and Israel have also banned animal testing for cosmetic products, while the United States has no such ban in place. [98] [99] [157] [158]
China is the only major market where testing all cosmetics on animals has been required by law, and foreign companies distributing their products to China must also have them tested on animals. China announced that its animal testing requirement will be waived for shampoo, perfume , and other “non-special use cosmetics” manufactured by Chinese companies after June 2014. “Special use cosmetics,” including hair regrowth, hair removal, dye and permanent wave products, antiperspirant, and sunscreen, will continue to warrant mandatory animal testing. China’s National Medical Products Administration announced that animal testing for “ordinary” cosmetics (those that do not make claims such as “anti-aging”) would no longer be required as of May 2021. [43] [65] [114] [149]
On September 2, 2021, Mexico became the 41st country and first in North America to ban cosmetics testing on animals, according to the Humane Society International. [150]
U.S. Government Reduction in Animal Testing
After ceasing to breed chimpanzees for research in May 2007, the U.S. National Institutes of Health announced in June 2013 that it would retire most of its chimpanzees (310 in total) over the next several years. While the decision was welcomed by animal rights groups, opponents said the decision would have a negative impact on the development of critical vaccines and treatments. The Texas Biomedical Research Institute released a statement claiming that the number of chimps to be retained (up to 50) was “not sufficient to enable the rapid development of better preventions and cures for hepatitis B and C, which kill a million people every year.” On November 18, 2015, the U.S. National Institutes of Health announced that its remaining 50 research chimpanzees will be retired to the Federal Chimpanzee Sanctuary System. Gabon remains the only country in the world that still experiments on chimpanzees. [4] [100] [117]
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) released a plan on September 10, 2019, to reduce studies using mammal testing by 30 percent by 2025 and to eliminate the mammal testing altogether by 2035. In November 2019, the FDA enacted a policy allowing some lab animals used for animal testing to be sent to shelters and sanctuaries for adoption. The National Institutes of Health (NIH) adopted a similar policy in August 2019 and the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) did so in 2018. [131] [146]
An April 29, 2025, New York Times report found that 300 lab animals at the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health lab in Morgantown, West Virginia, had to be euthanized due to budget cuts. The lab’s employees successfully relocated about 600 animals, mostly mice . Researchers at Harvard faced a budget freeze in April and were only able to save the rhesus macaques being used to develop a new tuberculosis vaccine with private funding. The reaction is split. On one hand, many are concerned about euthanizing animals for no reason other than a lack of funds and slowing down research. On the other hand, some approve of euthanizing the animals before they can be experimented on. [153]
That same day, the National Institutes of Health announced it would “reduce use of animals in NIH-funded research.” NIH director Jay Bhattacharya said, “This human-based approach will accelerate innovation, improve healthcare outcomes, and deliver life-changing treatments. It marks a critical leap forward for science, public trust, and patient care.” Furthermore, in a May 5, 2025, interview on Fox News, Bhattacharya said the NIH would end all beagle experiments on the NIH campus. [154] [155]
On May 27, 2025, Secretary of the Navy John C. Phelan announced on X, “Today it gives me great pleasure to terminate all Department of the Navy’s testing on cats and dogs, ending these inhumane practices and saving taxpayer dollars. This is long overdue.” [181]
In July 2025, employees at the EPA’s North Carolina research campus were being encouraged to apply to adopt research animals at the facility as pets. The particular research arm had been shut down by the Trump administration, leaving the animals with no homes, though the administration said the adoptions were due to animal welfare concerns. The campus had rabbits, rats, and zebra fish available for adoption to employees. [182]
Animal Testing and COVID-19
The COVID-19 (coronavirus) global pandemic brought attention to the debate about animal testing as researchers sought to develop a vaccine for the virus as quickly as possible. Vaccines are traditionally tested on animals to ensure their safety and effectiveness. News broke in March 2020 that there was a shortage of the genetically modified mice that were needed to test coronavirus vaccines. [133]
Meanwhile, other companies tried new development techniques that allowed them to skip animal testing and start with human trials. Moderna Therapeutics used a synthetic copy of the virus genetic code instead of a weakened form of the virus. The FDA approved an application for Moderna to begin clinical trials on a coronavirus vaccine on March 4, 2020, and the first participant was dosed on March 16, 2020. [143] [147]
A shortage of monkeys , including pink-faced rhesus macaques , threatened vaccine development at the beginning of the pandemic and as variants of COVID-19 were found. The monkeys were previously flown in from China, but a ban on wildlife imports from China forced researchers to look elsewhere, a difficult task as China previously supplied over 60 percent of research monkeys in the United States. [148]
Pros and Cons at a Glance
PROS
CONS
Pro 1: Animal testing contributes to life-saving cures and treatments for humans and animals alike. Read More.
Con 1: Animal testing is cruel and inhumane. Read More.
Pro 2: Animals are appropriate research subjects because they are similar to human beings. Read More.
Con 2: Animal tests do not reliably predict results in human beings. Read More.
Pro 3: Animal research is highly regulated, with laws in place to protect animals from mistreatment. Read More.
Con 3: Alternative testing methods now exist that can replace the need for animals. Read More.
Pro 1: Animal testing contributes to life-saving cures and treatments for humans and animals alike.
Nearly every medical breakthrough in the last 100 years has resulted directly from research using animals, according to the California Biomedical Research Association. To name just a few examples, animal research has contributed to major advances in treating conditions including breast cancer, brain injury, childhood leukemia, cystic fibrosis, multiple sclerosis, and tuberculosis. Testing on animals was also instrumental in the development of pacemakers, cardiac valve substitutes, and anesthetics. [9] [10] [11] [12] [13]
Scientists racing to develop a vaccine for coronavirus during the 2020 global pandemic needed to test on genetically modified mice to ensure that the vaccine did not make the virus worse. Nikolai Petrovsky, professor in the College of Medicine and Public Health at Flinders University in Australia, said testing a coronavirus vaccine on animals is “absolutely essential” and that skipping that step would be “fraught with difficulty and danger.” [119] [133]
Researchers have to test extensively to prevent “vaccine enhancement,” a situation in which a vaccine actually makes the disease worse in some people. “The way you reduce that risk is first you show it does not occur in laboratory animals,” explains Peter Hotez, dean for the National School of Tropical Medicine at Baylor College. [119] [141]
Further, animals themselves benefit from the results of animal testing. Vaccines tested on animals have saved millions of animals that would otherwise have died from rabies , distemper , feline leukemia , infectious hepatitis virus , tetanus , anthrax , and canine parvovirus . Treatments for animals developed using animal testing also include pacemakers for heart disease and remedies for glaucoma and hip dysplasia . [9] [21]
Animal testing has also been instrumental in saving endangered species from extinction , including the black-footed ferret , the California condor and the tamarins of Brazil. The American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA) endorses animal testing to develop safe drugs, vaccines, and medical devices. [9] [13] [23]
Pro 2: Animals are appropriate research subjects because they are similar to human beings.
Chimpanzees share 99 percent of their DNA with humans, and mice are 98 percent genetically similar to humans. All mammals, including humans, are descended from common ancestors, and all have the same set of organs (heart, kidneys, lungs, etc.) that function in essentially the same way with the help of a bloodstream and central nervous system. Because animals and humans are so biologically similar, they are susceptible to many of the same conditions and illnesses, including heart disease, cancer, and diabetes . [9] [17] [18]
Animals often make better research subjects than humans because of their shorter life cycles. Laboratory mice, for example, live for only two to three years, so researchers can study the effects of treatments or genetic manipulation over a whole lifespan, or across several generations, which would be infeasible using human subjects. Mice and rats are particularly well-suited to long-term cancer research, partly because of their short lifespans. [9] [29] [30]
Further, animals must be used in cases when ethical considerations prevent the use of human subjects. When testing medicines for potential toxicity, the lives of human volunteers should not be put in danger unnecessarily. It would be unethical to perform invasive experimental procedures on human beings before the methods have been tested on animals, and some experiments involve genetic manipulation that would be unacceptable to impose on human subjects before animal testing. The World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki states that human trials should be preceded by tests on animals. [19] [20]
A poll of 3,748 scientists by the Pew Research Center found that 89 percent favored the use of animals in scientific research. The American Cancer Society, American Physiological Society, National Association for Biomedical Research, American Heart Association, and the Society of Toxicology all advocate the use of animals in scientific research. [36] [37] [38] [39] [40] [120]
Pro 3: Animal research is highly regulated, with laws in place to protect animals from mistreatment.
In addition to local and state laws and guidelines, animal research has been regulated by the federal Animal Welfare Act (AWA) since 1966. As well as stipulating minimum housing standards for research animals (enclosure size, temperature, access to clean food and water, and others), the AWA also requires regular inspections by veterinarians . [3]
All proposals to use animals for research must be approved by an Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) set up by each research facility. Most major research institutions’ programs are voluntarily reviewed for humane practices by the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care International (AAALAC). [24] [25]
Animal researchers treat animals humanely, both for the animals’ sake and to ensure reliable test results. Research animals are cared for by veterinarians, animal husbandry specialists, and animal health technicians to ensure their well-being and more accurate findings. Rachel Rubino, attending veterinarian and director of the animal facility at Cold Springs Harbor Laboratory, says, “Most people who work with research animals love those animals….We want to give them the best lives possible, treat them humanely.” At Cedars-Sinai Medical Center’s animal research facility, dogs are given exercise breaks twice daily to socialize with their caretakers and other dogs, and a “toy rotation program” provides opportunities for play. [28] [32]