Table of Contents Ask the Chatbot
Dissecting a frog might be one of the most memorable school experiences for many students, whether they are enthusiastic participants, prefer lab time to lectures, or are conscientious objectors to dissection .
Early History of Animal Dissection
Descriptions of the dissection of live animals have been found in ancient Greek writings from as early as circa 500 BC. Physician-scientists such as Aristotle, Herophilus, and Erasistratus performed the experiments to discover the functions of living organisms. Vivisection (dissection of a living organism) was practiced on human criminals in Alexandria and ancient Rome, but ancient prohibitions and taboos against the mutilation of the human body led to a reliance on animal subjects. Aristotle believed that animals lacked intelligence, and so the notions of justice and injustice did not apply to them. Theophrastus, a successor to Aristotle, disagreed, objecting to the vivisection of animals on the grounds that, like humans, they can feel pain, and causing pain to animals was an affront to the gods. [29] [30]
What do you think?
Explore the ProCon debate
Roman physician and philosopher Galen (130–200 AD), whose theories of medicine were influential throughout Europe for 15 centuries, engaged in the public dissection of animals (including an elephant), which was a popular form of entertainment at the time. Galen also engaged in animal vivisection in order to develop theories on human anatomy, physiology, pathology, and pharmacology. In one of his experiments, he demonstrated that arteries, which were believed by earlier physicians to contain air, actually contained blood. Galen believed that animal physiology was very similar to that of human beings, but despite this similarity he had little sympathy for the animals on which he experimented. Galen recommended that his students vivisect animals “without pity or compassion” and warned that the “unpleasing expression of the ape when it is being vivisected” was to be expected. [30] [31] [32]
French philosopher René Descartes (1596–1650), who occasionally experimented on live animals, including at least one rabbit, as well as eels and fish, believed that animals were “automata” who could not experience pain or suffer the way that humans do. Descartes recognized that animals could feel, but because they could not think, he argued, they were unable to consciously experience those feelings. [33] [34]
English physician William Harvey (1578–1657) discovered that the heart, and not the lungs, circulated blood throughout the body as a result of his experiments on living animals. [35] [36]
There was little public objection to animal experimentation until the 19th century, when the increased adoption of domestic pets fueled interest in an anti-vivisection movement, primarily in England. This trend culminated in the founding of the Society for the Protection of Animals Liable to Vivisection in 1875, followed by the formation of similar groups. [37] [38]
Animal Dissection in Education
The use of animal dissection in education goes back as far as the 1500s, when Belgian doctor Andreas Vesalius used the practice as an instructional method for his medical students. One of the most significant physicians in history, Vesalius revolutionized the study of biology and the practice of medicine by his careful description of the anatomy of the human body. Based on his extensive dissection of human cadavers (dead bodies), he wrote and illustrated the first comprehensive textbook of anatomy; the famed work— De humani corporis fabrica libri septem (“On the Fabric of the Human Body in Seven Books”), commonly known as the Fabrica —was printed in 1543. [1] [39]
Animal dissections became part of American K–12 school curricula in the 1920s. About 75–80% of North American students will have dissected an animal by the time they graduate high school. More than 12 million animals are dissected in American schools each year. In at least 21 states and D.C., K–12 students have the legal option to request an alternative assignment to animal dissection. [2] [3] [27] [40]
While frogs are the most common animals for U.S. students to dissect, students may also dissect fetal pigs , cats , rabbits , guinea pigs , rats , minks , birds , turtles , snakes , crayfish , perch , sea stars , and earthworms as well as grasshoppers and other insects. Sometimes students dissect parts of animals, such as sheep lungs, cow eyes, and bull testicles. [2]
So, are animal dissections in K–12 schools crucial learning opportunities that encourage science careers and make good use of dead animals? Or are animal dissections unnecessary experiments that promote environmental damage when ethical alternatives exist? Explore the debate below.
Pros and Cons at a Glance
PROS
CONS
Pro 1: Dissecting real animals provides students with more learning opportunities. Read More.
Con 1: Methods used to supply animals for dissections are inhumane and bad for the environment. Read More.
Pro 2: Dissection can encourage students to pursue careers in science. Read More.
Con 2: Medical studies do not require or benefit from animal dissection. Read More.
Pro 3: Animal dissection is a productive and worthwhile use of dead animals. Read More.
Con 3: Dissecting real animals is unnecessary because alternatives exist. Read More.
Pro 1: Dissecting real animals provides students with more learning opportunities.
A 2022 study found that 83% of teachers surveyed in Switzerland agreed that “dissection is a valuable part of teaching biology in schools,” while 70% disagreed that “alternatives are just as good as animals or animal parts for teaching biology.” Additionally, 52% of the teachers were willing to use an alternative to dissection, but 46% said that it was not easy to do so. [26]
Dissecting an animal offers education in fine motor skills, hand-eye coordination, and handling sharp objects carefully. Hands-on learning keeps students more engaged, which facilitates assimilation of information. The American Psychological Association adds that animal dissection “engenders creativity, original thought, critical thinking, and problem-solving skills.” [5] [6]
Using a real animal also helps to instruct students on the ethics of using animals in research. Teachers can explain how the animals were sourced, demonstrate proper treatment of dead animals, and imbue a respect for life among students. [4]
Pro 2: Dissection can encourage students to pursue careers in science.
Vicki Besack, a high-school science teacher in Florida, said, “Dissection…is an amazing hands-on experience,” and added that it “has the power to cause a student to change how they think about science and possibly what they may pursue as a career. It gives them that ‘aha’ moment.” [7]
Teachers report that students gain invaluable hands-on science experience from dissection, including putting on lab coats and gloves, handling scalpels, and looking at samples under microscopes. The entire process can spark inspiration and excitement. [8]
Julianna Music, a former high-school student, argued in favor of dissection in the classroom by stating, “Biology is the study of life, and dissection is crucial for the understanding of life; it is a hands-on way to learn and paves a pathway for students with dreams of careers in that field….It lays the foundation for possible discoveries in animal diseases and prepares young people to become future veterinarians.” One of Music’s classmates developed a desire to become an optometrist after dissecting a sheep eye in school. [9]
Pro 3: Animal dissection is a productive and worthwhile use of dead animals.
A large portion of dissected animals were already dead before being allocated for dissection. Having students dissect the animals allows for a learning opportunity instead of just wasting the animal.
Bio Corp, a biological supply company, reported that more than 98% of the animals it received were already dead. Bill Wadd, co-owner of Bio Corp, stated, “We just take what people would throw away. Instead of throwing it in the trash, why not have students learn from it?” [10]
Most animals used in classroom dissections are purchased from biological supply companies. Some animals, such as cats, are sourced from shelters that have already euthanized the animals. However, cats and dogs account for fewer than 1% of lab animals. Fetal pigs are byproducts of the meat industry that would have otherwise been sent to a landfill. [11] [12]
Con 1: Methods used to supply animals for dissections are inhumane and bad for the environment.
Many of the animals used in classroom dissections are purchased from biological supply companies. An estimated 99% of animals used in dissections are caught in the wild, a practice that may decrease local populations, lead to an imbalance in the ecosystem, and reduce biodiversity. [2] [13] [14]
On the other hand, many fetal pigs used in school dissections have been sourced from the meat industry and raised in horrific conditions. Animalearn, the educational arm of the American Anti-Vivisection Society, said, “They are deprived of space, fresh air, and fresh forage for the duration of their shortened lives….The fetuses that end up in the dissection tray are taken from pregnant sows at the slaughterhouse.” [11]
Animals sold to schools for dissection may have died by suffocation, electrocution, drowning, or euthanasia. Cats and dogs used for dissection are sourced from shelters that unnecessarily euthanize the animals instead of adopting them out to families. [11]
Con 2: Medical studies do not require or benefit from animal dissection.
Animal dissection is not required by the College Board for AP Biology, the International Baccalaureate for IB Biology, or the Next Generation Science Standards. The inclusion of dissection units actually dissuades some students from taking elective science classes. [7] [15]
The Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine says that “animal dissection is not required for students to learn about and be engaged in science.” The group found that no medical schools in the U.S. or Canada use animals to train new physicians; revered medical programs at schools such as Stanford, Yale, Harvard, and the Mayo Clinic all use alternatives to animals. [15] [16] [17] [18]
Nedim C. Buyukmihci, professor of ophthalmology at the Veterinary Medicine School of the University of California at Davis, stated, “As one who did not dissect in high school, and who now is a veterinarian and trains doctors-to-be, I can unequivocally state that the experience of dissection is totally unnecessary for the biologically minded precollege student.” [19]
Con 3: Dissecting real animals is unnecessary because alternatives exist.
Synthetic frogs made by SynDaver have the same visual and textural qualities as a dead female frog: skeletons with muscles, skin, and organs, including a reproductive system with eggs. The models can be reused year-after-year and don’t need toxic formaldehyde for preservation. Students can use the model multiple times to gain a deeper understanding of the animal’s anatomy. [20] [21]
Technological advances have led to computer programs that can simulate the dissection of frogs, squid, fetal pigs, sea stars, and cow eyes. According to a meta-review by the Humane Society, students learn just as well or better when models and computer simulations are substituted for dead animals. Models and simulations also eliminate the “gross-out factor” of smelly, slimy real dead frogs, allowing students to focus on the learning activity rather than nausea. [22] [23]
PETA (People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals) even has a “Make Dissection Digital” campaign, urging “Cutting edge, not cutting bodies.” In an article titled “Dissection Is Dangerous, Unethical, and Unnecessary,” PETA argues, “Advance in technology and an increasingly progressive understanding of animal sentience have exposed animal dissection as obsolete, dangerous, and unethical.” [28]
Assessment Quiz
After reading the above debate, take our assessment quiz to test your knowledge of this issue. Good luck!
1-minute Survey
After reading this debate, take our quick survey to see how this information affected your opinion of this topic. We appreciate your feedback.
Discussion Questions
Several cultures, including those of many Native American tribes [24] , consider animal dissection to be taboo. Consider animal dissection as a cultural matter. Which communities disagree with animal dissection for cultural or religious reasons? What is their reasoning? How can schools accommodate these cultural views while promoting STEM studies and careers to the communities? Explain your answers.
Several cultures, including those of many Native American tribes
, consider animal dissection to be taboo. Consider animal dissection as a cultural matter. Which communities disagree with animal dissection for cultural or religious reasons? What is their reasoning? How can schools accommodate these cultural views while promoting STEM studies and careers to the communities? Explain your answers.
ProCon has listed three pros and three cons above. What other pros and cons can you list? Brainstorm a list and then choose one pro or con to research and write a sourced and cited paragraph to support.
ProCon has listed three pros and three cons above. What other pros and cons can you list? Brainstorm a list and then choose one pro or con to research and write a sourced and cited paragraph to support.
Have you had to (or will you have to) dissect an animal for science class in school? What are your thoughts? Will you perform the dissection or ask for an alternative assignment? Explain your answers.
Have you had to (or will you have to) dissect an animal for science class in school? What are your thoughts? Will you perform the dissection or ask for an alternative assignment? Explain your answers.
Biological supply companies often use formaldehyde to preserve animals for dissection. According to Ken Roy, writing for the National Science Teaching Association, formaldehyde is “a known nasal and dermal carcinogen” and can cause allergy-related symptoms. Roy cautions, “No specimens that are preserved in formaldehyde should be used in middle school science!” [25] What safety precautions should be taken if animals preserved in formaldehyde are used in high -school or college classrooms? Should animals be preserved in another way? Explain your answers.
Biological supply companies often use formaldehyde to preserve animals for dissection. According to Ken Roy, writing for the National Science Teaching Association, formaldehyde is “a known nasal and dermal carcinogen” and can cause allergy-related symptoms. Roy cautions, “No specimens that are preserved in formaldehyde should be used in middle school science!”
What safety precautions should be taken if animals preserved in formaldehyde are used in high -school or college classrooms? Should animals be preserved in another way? Explain your answers.
Could using technology to simulate animal dissections contribute to digital addiction? Explain your answer.
Could using technology to simulate animal dissections contribute to digital addiction? Explain your answer.
Take Action
Explore Home Science Tool’s array of animals for dissection and its section on the “Importance of Animal Dissection in Education.”
Explore
array of animals for dissection and its section on the “Importance of Animal Dissection in Education.”
Consider how you felt about the issue before reading this article. After reading the pros and cons on this topic, has your thinking changed? If so, how? List two to three ways. If your thoughts have not changed, list two to three ways your better understanding of the other side of the issue now helps you better argue your position.
Consider how you felt about the issue before reading this article. After reading the pros and cons on this topic, has your thinking changed? If so, how? List two to three ways. If your thoughts have not changed, list two to three ways your better understanding of the other side of the issue now helps you better argue your position.
Sources
Sneha Mantri, “Holistic Medicine and the Western Medical Tradition,” journalofethics.ama.assn.org, Mar. 2008
Jan Oakley, “Under the Knife: Animal Dissection as a Contested School Science Activity,” Journal for Activist Science & Technology Education , 2009
American Anti-Vivisection Society, “Student Choice Laws,” aavs.org (accessed Apr. 2, 2020)
Jan Oakley, “Science Teachers and the Dissection Debate: Perspectives on Animal Dissection and Alternatives,” International Journal of Environmental & Science Education , Apr. 2012
Edu-Lab, “The Importance of Dissection in Biology,” edulab.com, Oct. 7, 2016
American Psychological Association, “Resolution Reaffirming Support for Research and Teaching with Nonhuman Animals,” apa.org, Aug. 2017
Nancy Averett, “High School Dissections Are a Science Class Tradition. But Are They Doing More Harm Than Good?,” discovermagazine.com
Thomas Henley, “My Best Science Lesson: Dissecting Cow Brains to Explore Intelligence,” theguardian.com, Oct. 29, 2013
Julianna Music, “Pro: Dissection Prepares Students for the Field of Biology,” wvgazettemail.com, May 2, 2014
Ted Gregory and Susan Berger, “Is Dissecting a Frog in Science Class Ethical? Protesters Challenge the Long-Standing but Controversial Practice,” chicagotribune.com, June 1, 2018
Animalearn, “Frequently Asked Questions,” animalearn.org (accessed Apr. 1, 2020)
Carolina, “Dissection FAQs,” carolina.com, Mar. 2018
National Anti-Vivisection Society, “Frequently Asked Questions,” navs.org (accessed Apr. 2, 2020)
Editors of E Magazine , “Harvest of Shame,” emagazine.com, July 20, 2004
Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine, “Dissection Alternatives for Students,” pcrm.org, Feb. 22, 2019
Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine, “Last Remaining Medical School to Use Live Animals for Training Makes Switch to Human-Relevant Methods,” pcrm.org, June 30, 2016
Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine, “Tell UW to Modernize Its Medical Training,” pcrm.org (accessed Apr. 1, 2020)
Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine, “Statement from the Physicians Committee on Johns Hopkins University Eliminating the Use of Animals in Medical Training,” pcrm.org, May 18, 2016
Ricki Lewis, “Instructors Reconsider Dissection’s Role in Biology Classes,” the-scientist.com, Nov. 9, 1997
Julia Jacobo, “Florida High School Unveils Synthetic Frogs for Dissection in Biology Class,” abcnews.go.com, Nov. 26, 2019
Mary Caton, “Villanova Students Try Hand at Virtual Frog Dissection,” windsorstar.com, Nov. 27, 2019
Nicole Shine, “The Battle over High School Animal Dissection,” psmag.com, June 14, 2017
AP, “Fake Frogs in School Dissections Eliminate Gross-Out-Factor,” wtop.com, Dec. 31, 2019
Deborah H. Williams and Gerhard P. Shipley, “Cultural Taboos as a Factor in the Participation Rate of Native Americans in STEM,” International Journal of STEM Education , Apr. 11, 2018
Ken Roy, “Dissection: Don’t Cut Out Safety,” nsta.org, Feb. 2, 2007
Miriam A. Zemanova, “Attitudes Toward Animal Dissection and Animal-Free Alternatives Among High School Biology Teachers in Switzerland,” frontiersin.org, May 4, 2022
American Anti-Vivisection Society, “Student Choice Laws,” aavs.org (accessed Aug. 25, 2022)
PETA, “Dissection Is Dangerous, Unethical, and Unnecessary: Here’s Why,” headlines.peta.org (accessed Dec. 10, 2024)
Richard R. Sharp, “Ethical Issues in the Use of Animals in Biomedical Research” (accessed October 15, 2013), hhs.gov
Anita Guerrini, Experimenting with Humans and Animals: From Galen to Animal Rights (2003)
U.S. National Institutes of Health, “Greek Medicine: Galen” (February 7, 2012), nlm.nih.gov
Rachel Hajar, “Animal Testing and Medicine” (January-March 2011), Heart Views
Anita Guerrini, “The Rhetorics of Animal Rights” (2002), Applied Ethics in Animal Research: Philosophy, Regulation, and Laboratory Applications
Peter Singer, Animal Liberation (2009)
British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), “William Harvey (1578 - 1657)” (accessed October 15, 2013), bbc.co.uk
Domenico Ribatti, “William Harvey and the Discovery of the Circulation of the Blood” (September 21, 2009), Journal of Angiogenesis Research
British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection, “Records of the British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection” (accessed October 15, 2013) nationalarchives.gov.uk
George Dvorsky, “Do These Startling Longevity Studies Mean Your Lifespan Could Double?” (April 30, 2013) io9.com
Marcel Florkin, “Andreas Vesalius” (May 28, 2025), britannica.com
Animal Welfare Institute, “Dissection Alternatives,” awionline.org (accessed July 19, 2025)