Gary Johnson
Gary Johnson, former Governor of New Mexico, stated the following in a Dec. 1, 2011 online town hall co-hosted with GOProud:
As a believer in individual freedom and keeping government out of personal lives, I simply cannot find a legitimate justification for federal laws, such as the Defense of Marriage Act, which ’define’ marriage. That definition should be left to religions and individuals – not government.  Government’s role when it comes to marriage is one of granting benefits and rights to couples who choose to enter into a marriage ’contract’.  As I have examined this issue, consulted with folks on all sides, and viewed it through the lens of individual freedom and equal rights, it has become clear to me that denying those rights and benefits to gay couples is discrimination, plain and simple…
[G]overnment’s promise should be to insure equal access to those rights to all Americans, gay or straight… Today, I believe we have arrived at a point in history where more and more Americans are viewing it as a question of liberty and freedom. That evolution is important, and the time has come for us to align our marriage laws with the notion that every individual should be treated equally.
Editor’s Note: Prior to Gary Johnson’s Pro statement made on Dec. 1, 2011, he expressed a Not Clearly Pro or Con position as indicated below in a June 8, 2011 interview on C-SPAN.
Well, I think that government should get out of the marriage business, be in the civil union business, and leave marriages to the churches. So, I would like to think that I am in support of gay rights. Included in those rights would be the ability of gays to be civility united.
Barack Obama
Barack Obama, 44th President of the United States, made the following statement on May 9, 2012, during an interview with Robin Roberts from ABC’s Good Morning America, available at www.abcnews.go.com:
I have to tell you that over the course of several years as I have talked to friends and family and neighbors when I think about members of my own staff who are in incredibly committed monogamous relationships, same-sex relationships, who are raising kids together, when I think about those soldiers or airmen or marines or sailors who are out there fighting on my behalf and yet feel constrained, even now that Don’t Ask Don’t Tell is gone, because they are not able to commit themselves in a marriage, at a certain point I’ve just concluded that for me personally it is important for me to go ahead and affirm that I think same sex couples should be able to get married.
Editor’s Note: Barack Obama, 44th President of the United States, stated the following in an Oct. 3, 2011 interview with George Stephanopoulus on ABC News, available at www.abcnews.go.com:
President Obama: That at minimum, that gays and lesbians have strong civil unions that provide the same kinds of protections.
George Stephanopoulos: At minimum?
Obama: At minimum.
Stephanopoulos: So you’ve said your position is evolving. You said you’re struggling with it. What more do you need to know?
Obama: Well-- you know-- I probably won’t-- make news right now, George. But I-- I think that there’s no doubt that-- as I see-- friends, families-- children of gay couples-- who are thriving-- you know, that-- that has an impact on how I think about these issues. It’s also one of the reasons that I made the decision for us not to defend-- The Defense of Marriage Act, which-- I believe violated the Constitution. And, you know, is going to be-- decided in the courts probably-- in the next-- next few terms.
Stephanopoulos: You think you’ll change your mind before the election?
Obama: You know-- I-- I’m-- I’m-- still working on it."
Editor’s Note: Prior to Barack Obama’s Not Clearly Pro or Con statement from Oct. 3, 2011, he expressed a Con position as indicated by the statement from Aug. 18, 2008 interview with Reverend Rick Warren of Saddleback Church, available at www.suntimes.com:
I believe that marriage is between a man and a woman. For me, as a Christian, it is also a sacred union. You know, God’s in the mix.
Editor’s Note: Prior to Barack Obama’s Con statement from Aug. 18, 2008, he expressed a Pro position as indicated by the statement from a Feb. 15, 1996 questionnaire for Chicago gay and lesbian newspaper Outlines, reprinted in the June 18, 2011 article, "Obama’s Views on Gay Marriage ‘Evolving;”:
I favor legalizing same-sex marriages, and would fight efforts to prohibit such marriages.
Jill Stein
Jill Stein, MD, former Professor of Medicine at Harvard Medical School, was quoted in a May 11, 2012 article "Stein Welcomes Obama’s New Position on Marriage Equality," available at www.jillstein.org:
I’m proud that I don’t have to change my position to match the polls. I have supported marriage equality since at least 2002, when I ran for governor. And I’m going to continue to work to eliminate this insidious form of discrimination. President Obama is still enforcing the Defense of Marriage Act - and that has to stop. And the President is saying that its acceptable for individual states to discriminate. I believe that when it comes to basic rights, it’s improper for a President to treat them as local options. The federal government is charged with defending the human rights of all people, no matter which state they live in.