Table of Contents Ask the Chatbot
ARCHIVED TOPIC: This topic was archived on Oct. 15, 2020 and will no longer be updated.
Iran shot down a U.S. unmanned military drone using a surface-to-air missile system on June 19, 2019. [1] While Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps (IRGC) claims the drone violated Iranian airspace, the United States military claims the drone was shot down unprovoked over international waters. [2] Jackie Northam, NPR International Affairs Correspondent, stated, “The U.S. and Iran agree on a couple of things. It was an American surveillance drone that Iran shot down, and it landed in the Strait of Hormuz , a dog-legged waterway that skirts Iran. But after that, both sides are offering up dueling statements, maps and accusations about where the drone was hit.” [3]
In 1982, the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) established that the maritime territory of a country extends to 12 nautical miles (13.8 miles) from its coastline. [4] As of Mar. 7, 2019, 168 countries are party to the treaty. Iran signed the treaty in 1982 but did not ratify it. [5] The United States neither signed nor ratified the treaty but does adhere to it. [6] [7] Both countries have claimed sovereignty over the 12 nautical mile territorial sea as measured from their coasts. [8] [9] The sovereignty of a nation’s territorial sea includes the airspace above. [10]
Pros and Cons at a Glance
PROS
CONS
Pro 1: Lt. Gen. Joseph Guastella, Commander of U.S. Air Forces Central Command, says the drone was 34 kilometers away from Iran. Read More.
Con 1: Mohammad Javad Zarif, Iran’s foreign minister, says the drone was over Iran’s waters. Read More.
Pro 2: The Pentagon says the drone was over international waters. Read More.
Con 2: Irans calls the shooting self-defense. Read More.
Pro 3: The White House says the drone was over international waters. Read More.
Con 3: The Islamic Revolution Guards Corps says the drone was in stealth mode. Read More.
Pro 1: Lt. Gen. Joseph Guastella, Commander of U.S. Air Forces Central Command, says the drone was 34 kilometers away from Iran.
Lt. Gen. Joseph Guastella, Commander of U.S. Air Forces Central Command, said on June 20, 2019 that the U.S. surveillance drone “was operating at high-altitude approximately 34 kilometers [21.1 miles] from the nearest point of land on the Iranian coast.” [11]
According to Guastella, the drone was flying over the Gulf of Oman and the Strait of Hormuz and fell into international waters after being shot down. He also said, “This attack is an attempt to disrupt our ability to monitor the area following recent threats to international shipping and free flow of commerce. Iranian reports that this aircraft was shot down over Iran are categorically false.” [11]
Pro 2: The Pentagon says the drone was over international waters.
The Pentagon said U.S. surveillance drone was on a reconnaissance mission following attacks on oil tankers in the region and released a map showing that it was shot down over international waters. [14] [15]
Pro 3: The White House says the drone was over international waters.
The White House has confirmed that the drone was flying in international airspace. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said in a statement that “the United States has shown beyond any doubt that Iran shot down a U.S. unmanned aircraft in international airspace. Foreign Minister Zarif’s hand-drawn map disputing this fact is not credible. This attack marks the second time Iran targeted an American unmanned aircraft in recent weeks.” [17]
President Trump also spoke about the drone’s location, saying, “This drone was in international waters, clearly. We have it all documented. It’s documented scientifically, not just words.” [18]
Con 1: Mohammad Javad Zarif, Iran’s foreign minister, says the drone was over Iran’s waters.
Mohammad Javad Zarif, Iran’s foreign minister, wrote on Twitter on June 20, 2019 that, “At 00:14 US drone took off from UAE in stealth mode & violated Iranian airspace. It was targeted at 04:05 at the coordinates (25°59’43″N 57°02’25″E) near Kouh-e Mobarak. We’ve retrieved sections of the US military drone in OUR territorial waters where it was shot down.” [12]
The coordinates provided by Zarif place the US drone about eight miles off the coast of Iran, well within the 12 nautical miles that mark Iran’s territory. [13]
Con 2: Irans calls the shooting self-defense.
Iran asserts that shooting down what it calls a US spy drone was within its right of “self-defence if an armed attack occurs,” as stated in Article 51 of the UN Charter. [13] [16]
Con 3: The Islamic Revolution Guards Corps says the drone was in stealth mode.
The Islamic Revolution Guards Corps (IRGC) said that the US drone took off at 00:14 local time from a US military base south of the Persian Gulf and turned off all identification to operate in stealth mode, then entered Iranian airspace on its return journey. [19]
The IRGC stated, “The drone started collecting intel in a spying operation when it was returning towards the Western parts of the region near the Strait of Hormuz and it violated the airspace over the Islamic Republic of Iran’s territory. The IRGC Aerospace Force’s air defense system targeted and destroyed the hostile aircraft which had entered Iran’s territorial airspace at 04:05 am.” [19]
Discussion Questions
Is it possible that either the United States or Iran gave the GPS coordinates in good faith but somehow made a mistake about the actual location of the US drone? Explain your thoughts.
Is it possible that either the United States or Iran gave the GPS coordinates in good faith but somehow made a mistake about the actual location of the US drone? Explain your thoughts.
What other motivations or specific reasons could either country have for their statements on the drone’s location aside from lying or misleading?
What other motivations or specific reasons could either country have for their statements on the drone’s location aside from lying or misleading?
Sources
Natasha Turak, “Iran Shoots down American Drone in International Airspace in ‘Unprovoked Attack,’ US Says,” cnbc.com, June 20, 2019
BBC News, “Strait of Hormuz: US Confirms Drone Shot down by Iran,” bbc.com, June 20, 2019
Jackie Northam, “U.S. and Iran Disagree over whether Drone Was Shot down over Iranian Territory,” npr.org, June 20, 2019
World Ocean Review,” WOR 3 Marine Resources – Opportunities and Risks,” worldoceanreview.com, 2014
United Nations Treaty Collection, “United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,” un.org, Mar. 7, 2019
Ian Beck, “The U.S. and the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea,” intpolicydigest.org, Nov. 22, 2018
Patrick Goodenough, “As US, Iran Tussle over Location of Downed Drone, Trump Says ‘This Country Will Not Stand for It,’” cnsnews.com, June 20, 2019
US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, “U.S. Maritime Limits & Boundaries,” nauticalcharts.noaa.gov (accessed July 2, 2019)
Mark J. Valencia, “Overreaction in the Strait of Hormuz,” thediplomat.com, May 11, 2015
United Nations, “United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea: Part II Territorial Sea and Contiguous Zone,” un.org (accessed July 2, 2019)
Diana Stancy Correll, “Pentagon Issues Map Depicting US Drone Shot over International Waters,” militarytimes.com, June 20, 2019
Tom O’Connor, “Iran Tries to Counter U.S. Military Claims by Releasing Drawing of What It Says Happened to Drone,” newsweek.com, June 20, 2019
Tehran Times, “Iran Files Complaint against U.S. over Violating Its Airspace,” tehrantimes.com, June 29, 2019
Jim Garamone, “Iran Shoots Down U.S. Global Hawk Operating in International Airspace,” defense.gov, June 20, 2019
Talia Kaplan, “Pentagon Releases Map Disputing Claim US Drone Violated Iranian Airspace; Iran’s Version Is Very Different,” foxnews.com, June 20, 2019
United Nations, “Chapter VII — Action with Respect to Threats to the Peace, Breaches of the Peace, and Acts of Aggression,” Charter of the United Nations (accessed July 2, 2019)
Michael R. Pompeo, “Statement on Iranian Disinformation,” state.gov, June 22, 2019
Michael D. Shear, Eric Schmitt, Michael Crowley and Maggie Haberman, “Strikes on Iran Approved by Trump, Then Abruptly Pulled Back,” nytimes.com, June 20, 2019
Fars News Agency, “Iran: US Drone Warned Several Times,” en.farsnews.com, June 21, 2019