The debate about protesting during the playing of the U.S. national anthem (“ The Star-Spangled Banner ”) was ignited by NFL quarterback Colin Kaepernick in 2016, when he first sat during the playing of the national anthem and then switched to kneeling in protest of racial bigotry and police brutality . His protest spurred many other NFL players, professional athletes in other sports, and even high school student athletes to do the same, sparking a national controversy and a public conversation about the appropriateness of this manner of protest. [7] [8] [9]
What do you think?
Explore the ProCon debate
The poem on which the U.S. national anthem is based, “The Star-Spangled Banner,” was written during the War of 1812 by Francis Scott Key, an American lawyer and poet. He was inspired to write the poem in the early morning dawn of September 14, 1814, the morning after he had witnessed the relentless British bombardment of Fort McHenry in Baltimore Harbor. He saw the American flag still flying over the fortress, a signal that the British had been defeated, whereupon he began writing the words that would become “The Star-Spangled Banner.” [1] [47] [48]
In October 1814, the poem was set to the music of “To Anacreon in Heaven,” a popular British drinking song, and throughout the 19th century the song grew in popularity, performed regularly by military bands, at patriotic events like the Fourth of July, and toward the end of the century at baseball games. The song had become an unofficial national anthem of sorts, but it was not officially named the country’s national anthem until President Herbert Hoover declared it so with the signing of a bill on March 3, 1931. [1] [47] [48] [49]
Kaepernick’s protest during the anthem in 2016 spread to the 2017 NFL pre-season, when Black players from the Seattle Seahawks , Oakland Raiders , and Philadelphia Eagles knelt or remained seated during the anthem with support of white teammates. On August 21, 12 Cleveland Browns players knelt in a prayer circle during the national anthem with at least four other players standing with their hands on the shoulders of their kneeling teammates as a sign of solidarity with their protest. [20] [21]
Jabrill Peppers, a rookie safety for the Cleveland Browns , said of the protest, “There’s a lot of racial and social injustices in the world that are going on right now. We just decided to take a knee and pray for the people who have been affected and just pray for the world in general…. We were not trying to disrespect the flag or be a distraction to the team, but as men we thought we had the right to stand up for what we believed in, and we demonstrated that.” [21]
Seth DeValve, a tight end for the Browns and the first white NFL player to kneel during the anthem, stated, “The United States is the greatest country in the world. And it is because it provides opportunities to its citizens that no other country does. The issue is that it doesn’t provide equal opportunity to everybody, and I wanted to support my African-American teammates today who wanted to take a knee. We wanted to draw attention to the fact that there’s things in this country that still need to change.” [20]
However, some Cleveland Browns fans expressed their dissatisfaction on the team’s Facebook page. One commenter posted, “Pray before or pray after. Taking a knee during the National Anthem these days screams disrespect for our Flag, Our Country and our troops. My son and the entire armed forces deserve better than that.” [22]
On Friday, September 22, 2017, President Donald Trump stated his opposition to NFL players kneeling during the anthem: “Wouldn’t you love to see one of these NFL owners, when somebody disrespects our flag, to say ‘Get that son of a b--ch off the field right now. Out! He’s fired. He’s fired!” The statement set off a firestorm on both sides of the debate. NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell replied, “Divisive comments like these demonstrate an unfortunate lack of respect for the NFL, our great game and all of our players, and a failure to understand the overwhelming force for good our clubs and players represent in our communities.” [23]
The controversy continued over the weekend as the president continued to tweet about the issue and others contributed opinions for and against kneeling during the anthem. On Sunday, September 24, in London before the first NFL game played since the president’s comments, at least two dozen players from the Baltimore Ravens and Jacksonville Jaguars knelt during the American national anthem, while other players, coaches, and staff locked arms, including Shad Khan, who is the only Pakistani-American Muslim NFL team owner. Throughout the day, players, coaches, owners, and staff from other teams (except from the Carolina Panthers ) knelt or linked arms. The Pittsburgh Steelers chose to remain in the locker room during the anthem, though offensive tackle and Army Ranger veteran Alejandro Villanueva stood at the entrance to the field alone, for which he later apologized. Both the Seattle Seahawks and the Tennessee Titans stayed in their locker rooms before their games, leaving the field mostly empty during the anthem. The Seahawks stated, “As a team, we have decided we will not participate in the national anthem. We will not stand for the injustice that has plagued people of color in this country. Out of love for our country and in honor of the sacrifices made on our behalf, we unite to oppose those that would deny our most basic freedoms.” [24] [25] [27]
The controversy jumped to other sports, too, as every player on WNBA ’s Indiana Fever knelt on Friday, September 22, 2017 (though WNBA players had been kneeling for months); Oakland A ’s catcher Bruce Maxwell knelt on Saturday becoming the first MLB player to do so; and Joel Ward of the NHL ’s San Jose Sharks said he would not rule out kneeling. USA soccer ’s Megan Rapinoe knelt during the anthem in 2016, prompting the U.S. Soccer Federation to issue Policy 604-1, ordering all players to stand during the anthem. [28] [29] [30] [31] [35]
The country was still debating the issue well into the week, with President Trump tweeting on September 26: “The NFL has all sort of rules and regulations. The only way out for them is to set a rule that you can’t kneel during our National Anthem!” [26]
On May 23, 2018, the NFL announced that all 32 team owners agreed that all players and staff on the field shall “stand and show respect for the flag and the Anthem” or face “appropriate discipline.” However, players were no longer required to be on the field during the anthem and could wait off field or in the locker room. The new rules were adopted without input from the players’ union. On July 20, 2018, the NFL and the NFL Players Association (NFLPA) issued a joint statement putting the anthem policy on hold until the two organizations could come to an agreement. [32] [33] [34]
During the nationwide Black Lives Matter protests following the death of George Floyd on May 25, 2020, official league positions on kneeling began to change. On June 5, 2020, NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell stated, “We, the National Football League , condemn racism and the systematic oppression of black people. We, the National Football League, admit we were wrong for not listening to NFL players earlier and encourage all players to speak out and peacefully protest.” [39]
Before the June 7, 2020, race, NASCAR lifted the guidelines that all team members must stand during the anthem, allowing NASCAR official and Army veteran Kirk Price to kneel during the anthem. [40]
On June 10, 2020, the U.S. Soccer Federation rescinded the league’s requirement that players stand during the anthem amid the Black Lives Matter protests following the death of George Floyd. The U.S. Soccer Federation stated, “It has become clear that this policy was wrong and detracted from the important message of Black Lives Matter.” [35]
In the wake of the 2020 killing of George Floyd and the protests that followed, 52% of Americans stated it was “OK for NFL players to kneel during the National Anthem to protest the police killing of African Americans.” [41]
While the debate largely quieted after the summer of 2020, there was a brief resurgence of athletes displaying political gestures on Olympic podiums in Tokyo in 2021 and Beijing in 2022 . Additionally, on November 29, 2024, three Colorado State University (CSU) women’s volleyball players knelt during the national anthem before a tournament game against San Diego State University.
Now some sporting events also include the playing of “Lift Every Voice and Sing,” a hymn widely called the Black American national anthem, in addition to “The Star-Spangled Banner.” The hymn, written by James Weldon Johnson and his brother and first performed in 1900, became the official song of the NAACP in 1919, and it was omnipresent during the Civil Rights movement of the 1950s and 60’s and has been recorded or sung by many Black artists, from Ray Charles and Aretha Franklin to Jon Batiste and Beyoncé . [46]
So, is kneeling during the national anthem an appropriate form of protest? Explore the debate below.
Con 1: Kneeling during the national anthem shows disrespect for the flag and members of the armed forces.
The national anthem pays respect to the people who have risked their lives, been injured, or died defending the United States. Carole Isham, a great-great-great-granddaughter of the writer of the national anthem (Francis Scott Key) stated that “it just blows my mind that somebody like (Kaepernick) would do what he does to dishonor the flag of this country and the national anthem when we have young men and women overseas fighting for this country, people that have died for this country.” [13]
Drew Brees, New Orleans Saints quarterback, supported Kaepernick’s message but disagreed with the delivery: “[I]t’s an oxymoron that you’re sitting down, disrespecting that flag that has given you the freedom to speak out.” Brees reiterated his position on June 3, 2020 in the wake of the George Floyd killing. However, in light of the backlash that followed, Brees retracted his statement. In reaction, on June 5, 2020, President Trump tweeted, “OLD GLORY is to be revered, cherished, and flown high…. “We should be standing up straight and tall, ideally with a salute, or a hand on heart. There are other things you can protest, but not our Great American Flag – NO KNEELING!” [18] [36] [37] [38]
Con 2: Kneeling during the national anthem is an ineffective and counterproductive way to promote a cause.
Clemson University football coach Dabo Swinney said in a press conference: “I don’t think it’s good to be a distraction to your team. I don’t think it’s good to use your team as the platform.” [4]
President Obama expressed concern that not standing for the national anthem can get in the way of the message: “As a general matter, when it comes to the flag the national anthem and the meaning that holds for our men and women in uniform and those who’ve fought for us — that is a tough thing for them to get past to then hear what his [Kaepernick’s] deeper concerns are.” [3]
Malcolm Jenkins, safety for the Philadelphia Eagles, supported Kaepernick’s message but said, “My grandfather served [in the military]. And this is a country that I love. So, me not standing for the national anthem isn’t really going to get me the results that I want.” [19]
Con 3: Kneeling during the national anthem angers many, spurring greater social division and even ruining careers.
Kaepernick and others who have refused to stand for the national anthem have caused division among their teams, their fans, and across the country. The Santa Clara police union hinted they would boycott providing security at games after Kaepernick revealed his reasons for protesting the national anthem and wore socks depicting pigs in police uniforms. Even some observers supportive of protests found the pig-depictions reprehensible. [14] [15] [45]
Fans have burned Kaepernick’s jersey to show their distaste for his actions. One video of a jersey on fire posted on Facebook was captioned, “He says he’s oppressed making $126 million. Well, Colin, here’s my salute to you.” [17]
Kneeling has also been detrimental to careers, perhaps even Kaepernick’s. The quarterback’s play suffered in the seasons after his protest, and few teams would offer him a contract; he eventually filed suit against the NFL, charging team owners with conspiring to keep him out of the league. According to a 2023 study by Leeds School of Business Assistant Professor Ethan Poskanzer, many of the first 50 NFL players to kneel were soon out of a contract, offered less lucrative contracts, or playing for different, more sympathetic teams. In fact, adds Poskanzer, “Players who protested in a less-supportive team environment earned less money for the next five years than other players on more supportive teams.” The study concludes that such protests “can have negative career consequences to take into account when deciding whether to participate.” [43]