Table of Contents Ask the Chatbot
According to the American Golf Industry Coalition in 2025, golf generates a direct economic impact of $102 billion annually and supports nearly 2 million jobs nationwide. When golf’s indirect contributions (through its impact on travel, hotel stays, and home purchases) are included, the annual contribution to the U.S. economy tops $226 billion. [95] Some 1-in-7 Americans participate in golf in some way, while the game’s total reach (when watching, streaming, and reading about golf are considered) entails about one-third of the population. [69] [70] [71] [72] [97]
But despite the obvious popularity of golf and its omnipresence globally, there is still a debate over how to classify the game and its participants. Specifically, is golf a sport and are golfers athletes?
Early History of Golf
What do you think?
Explore the ProCon debate
The origins of golf remain somewhat murky because several countries invented games that involved hitting a ball with a club at a target. The 11th-century French game “palle-mail” or “jeu de mail” and the 13th-century Dutch game “ kolven ” are arguably predecessors to golf. A claim has even been made that the Chinese recorded a description of the game in a text written during the Song Dynasty (960–1279 ce ). [42] [43]
The invention of golf as we know it today, with the crucial aspect of hitting a ball into a hole, is generally credited to Scotland in the 1300s. Historians say that golf was played at St. Andrews in Scotland even before the university was founded in 1411. [42] [43]
In the Middle Ages the Scots were so captivated by golf that King James II feared it was interfering with the archery practice needed to help protect Scotland against the English. On Mar. 6, 1457, the Scottish Parliament banned golf with a decree that read, “[I]t is ordained and the decreed that the lords and barons both spiritual and temporal should organise archery displays four times in the year. And that football and golf should be utterly condemned and stopped.… [W]e ordain that [those found playing these games] be punished by the local barons and, failing them, by the King’s officers.” The ban was lifted in 1502 when the Treaty of Glasgow temporarily ended the wars between Scotland and England. King James IV made the first recorded purchase of golf equipment in that same year and became an avid golfer. [1] [44] [45]
St. Andrews, the home of the Royal and Ancient Golf Club of St. Andrews (R&A), originated the 18-hole golf course in 1764 when golfers felt that some of the holes on the then 22-hole course should be consolidated. To this day 18 holes remain the standard for a round of golf. In 1897 the R&A was recognized by existing golf organizations as having the authority to determine the rules of golf. According to the official rulebook, “The Game of Golf consists of playing a ball with a club from the teeing ground into the hole by a stroke or successive strokes in accordance with the Rules.” The first golf club in America was St. Andrew’s Golf Course in Yonkers, NY, built in 1888. The Amateur Golf Association of the United States (now called United States Golf Association, or USGA) was formed on Dec. 22, 1894. [1] [46] [47]
Definition of Sport
The question of whether golf is a sport hinges on the definition of “sport.” Merriam-Webster defines sport as “physical activity engaged in for pleasure; a particular activity (as an athletic game) so engaged in.” [6]
John C. Phillips, professor of sociology at the University of the Pacific, asserts that people have an instinctual idea about what “sport” means. “In one sense,” he argues, “the word sport need not be analyzed. Anyone who speaks English knows what sport is and is not.” The topic has nonetheless been subject to significant analysis. [48]
Sports philosopher Bernard Suits names four elements that distinguish sports from games. “First, it is a game of skill, which marks it off from games of chance.… Second, it is a game of physical skill…. Third, a sport is a game that has a wide following…. Fourth, and last, a sport is a game that has achieved institutional stability.” [49]
Sociologists Tim Delaney and Tim Madigan define sport as “institutionalized, structured, and sanctioned competitive activity beyond the realm of play that involves physical exertion and the use of relatively complex athletic skills.” [48]
Lincoln Allison, founding director of the Centre for the Study of Sport in Society at Warwick University, notes that the definition has also shifted over time. “In English, the primary meaning of the word ‘sport’ changed dramatically in the period after 1880. Before that date, if you picked up a book on sport . . . it would certainly have been about some combination of hunting, shooting or fishing.” According to Allison, the modern concept of sport began to solidify around 1930. “And yet, for all that sport can mean . . . the core of what people understand by sport in its serious and interesting sense can be defined briefly: sport is the institutionalisation of skill and prowess.” [50]
Definition of Athlete
Merriam-Webster defines “ athlete ” as “a person who is trained or skilled in exercises, sports, or games requiring physical strength, agility, or stamina.” [91]
The word, according to researchers Francesco Campa and Giuseppe Coratella, “comes from the Greek root ‘Athlos’ which means ‘achievement’ or ‘contest’ and a more complex figure than just the simple sportsman, since he/she embodied the greatest virtues of a human being. The first testimony of the term athlete is found in the Odyssey , when Ulysses was mocked by Feaci for not wanting to participate in sports competitions, and they accused him of being greedy, lacking virtue and consequently not being an athlete.” [93]
Ross Tucker, sports science researcher for World Rugby, adds nuance to the definition: “You have to expand the definition of ‘competition’ to be broader than just competing against other athletes in that specific moment. For instance, is a person who climbs Mount Everest an athlete? I’d say so, because they’re pushing boundaries, which I think meets a definition of competition where ‘competitive’ means challenging oneself to perform better.” [92]
However, some believe everyone could be an athlete. As sports psychologist Jim Afremow argues, “The reason why I think embracing an athletic identity is important for us is it becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. Our thoughts and beliefs about ourselves lead to expectations about our actions. And then those lead to those behaviors and actions, and that reinforces itself where it bolsters our sense of being an athlete.” He continues: “There is an athlete in all of us. It doesn’t matter where you come from or what your particular situation is. What matters is thinking of yourself as an athlete, having athletic goals and reaping the rewards of being more active.” Nike, the sports apparel company, echoes this idea in their mission statement: “If you have a body, you are an athlete.” [92] [94]
The debate over the fitness level required to succeed as and to be considered a professional athlete continues, however. Those who say golf is a sport point to the athleticism of top golfers such as Tiger Woods and Rory McIlroy . Woods, in his prime, reportedly bench-pressed 315 pounds, and much has been made of McIlroy’s improved results following his commitment to become more muscular. Those who say golf is not a sport point to the example of John Daly, a professional golfer who won two Majors even though he once weighed as much as 285 pounds and struggled with alcoholism. At a 2008 tournament, during one round of golf (18 holes), Daly notoriously smoked 21 cigarettes and consumed 12 Diet Cokes, 6 packs of Peanut M&M’s, and zero water. [20] [64] [65] [96]
As Popular Science succinctly framed this debate: “Is Tiger Woods proof that golf is a sport, or is John Daly confirmation to the contrary?” It even ventured an answer, suggesting it “probably depends on whether you’ve got a set of clubs in the garage.” [7]
Golf in the Olympics
For many, the Olympics serve as a barometer for whether an activity should be viewed as a sport and its players athletes. Golf was included in the Olympics in 1900 (for men and women) and 1904 (for men only) before being removed. The golf events in the 1904 Olympics, held in St. Louis, Missouri, consisted of 74 American and three Canadian men. In 1908 the golf events were canceled reportedly because of a lack of international entries and a conflict with the R&A. Subsequent years also saw a dearth of competitors that resulted in the game’s continued absence from the Summer Olympic Games . [51] [52] [53]
The first major push to return golf to international sporting competition did not come until 1992, when the Atlanta Olympic Organizing Committee announced its intent to get golf approved for the 1996 Games. The proposal was met with opposition from major golf organizations, who were reportedly concerned about having their regular tour events overshadowed. The committee’s plan to hold the event at Augusta National Golf Club prompted concern because at the time the club had a male-only membership and just one Black member, and so the proposal was withdrawn. On Aug. 20, 2012, Augusta announced that two women, former Secretary of State Condoleeza Rice and businesswoman Darla Moore, were accepted as members—the first women admitted in the 80-year history of the club. [53] [67]
Another bid to include golf was rejected in 2005, reportedly due to lack of support from the professional golf tours. A Sports Illustrated poll conducted in May 2005 found that 29% of respondents thought golf should be added to the Olympics, second to rugby, favored by 38%. [54] [55]
In 2009 the International Olympic Committee (IOC) members voted 63–27 to return golf to the 2016 Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro , Brazil. Rugby was also voted in for the first time since it was removed in 1924. IOC president Jacques Rogge voiced his support for the decision, saying, “Both golf and rugby are very popular sports with global appeal and a strong ethic. They will be great additions to the Games.” [2] [56] [57]
Some people who opposed including golf said that the vote was neither a reflection of golf’s merit nor an endorsement that it is a sport, but rather that the IOC wished to add golf because of megastar golfer Tiger Woods and golf’s potential for increased sponsorships and television earnings. [37] [38]
Olympic golf has been played at the following courses: Compiègne Golf Club (Paris, 1900); Glen Echo Country Club, Normandy, Missouri (St. Louis, 1904); Olympic Golf Course, Barra da Tijuca (Rio de Janeiro, 2016); Kasumigaseki Country Club, Kawagoe (Tokyo, 2020); and Albatros Course at Le Golf National, Guyancourt (Paris, 2024). For upcoming Olympic Games, golf will be played at the following courses: Riviera Country Club, Pacific Palisades, California (Los Angeles, 2028); and Royal Queensland Golf Club, Eagle Farm, Queensland (Brisbane, 2032). [74] [75] [76]
Golf in the Supreme Court
On May 29, 2001, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled 7–2 in PGA Tour, Inc. v. Martin that the Professional Golfers’ Association (PGA) Tour had to allow disabled golfer Casey Martin to use a golf cart, despite the PGA’s claim that “the condition of walking is a substantive rule of competition” in professional tournaments. Martin was born with Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber Syndrome, a degenerative disease that caused Martin’s right leg to atrophy and made him unable to walk across a golf course. The Court noted that Martin was a “talented golfer” who won his state high school golf championship and captained the 1994 Stanford University NCAA champion golf team.
The decision, delivered by Justice John Paul Stevens , said, in part, “We observe that the use of carts is not itself inconsistent with the fundamental character of the game of golf. From early on, the essence of the game has been shotmaking—using clubs to cause a ball to progress from the teeing ground to a hole some distance away with as few strokes as possible.” The decision further stated that “Golf is a game in which it is impossible to guarantee that . . . an individual’s ability will be the sole determinant of the outcome. For example, changes in the weather may produce harder greens and more head winds for the tournament leader than for his closest pursuers. A lucky bounce may save a shot or two.”
In the dissenting opinion, Justice Antonin Scalia asserted that the issue of whether walking is essential to the game of golf was irrelevant, but noted that “Many, indeed, consider walking to be the central feature of the game of golf hence Mark Twain ’s classic criticism of the sport: ‘a good walk spoiled.’” [4] [68]
Casey Martin earned $206,874 over the course of his career as a professional golfer and is now the golf coach for the University of Oregon.
MET Values
Metabolic Equivalent of Task (MET) values are a way to estimate how many calories are burned during a specific physical activity, according to the American Council on Exercise. A higher value correlates with more oxygen used by the body during that activity, so running has a higher MET value than sitting still, for example.
According to The Compendium of Physical Activities , “MET (Metabolic Equivalent) [is] the ratio of the work metabolic rate to the resting metabolic rate. One MET is defined as 1 kcal/kg/hour and is roughly equivalent to the energy cost of sitting quietly. A MET also is defined as oxygen uptake in ml/kg/min with one MET equal to the oxygen cost of sitting quietly, equivalent to 3.5 ml/kg/min.”
To find the MET values for golf and more activities, visit the Compendium of Physical Activities .
Pros and Cons at a Glance
PROS
CONS
Pro 1: Golf meets the definition of sport and golfers that of athletes by requiring physical exertion. Read More.
Con 1: Golf does not require enough physical exertion from golfers to meet the definitions of sport or athlete. Read More.
Pro 2: Golf meets the definition of sport and golfers that of athletes by being competitive. Read More.
Con 2: Golfers are not consistently competitive enough to meet the definitions of sport and athlete. Read More.
Pro 3: Golf meets the definition of sport and golfers that of athletes by requiring skill to play. Read More.
Con 3: Golf requires skill but involves too much happenstance to be considered a sport and its players athletes. Read More.
Pro 1: Golf meets the definition of sport and golfers that of athletes by requiring physical exertion.
Golfing without a cart burns an average of 360 calories per hour. Golfers who play a nine-hole course (2–2.5 miles) without a cart while carrying their own clubs burn 721 calories (613 calories if a caddie carries the bag of clubs, which weigh 30–50 pounds on average). Professional tournaments have four rounds of 18 holes, which would be 4,904 calories burned over four days. [8] [9] [10] [11] [29]
Further, golf’s demand for physical exertion often results in injuries. Golf is so physically demanding that up to 62% of amateur golfers and approximately 88% of professional golfers suffer injuries each year. Playing golf can lead to problems in the lower back, elbow, wrist, hand, shoulder, or head. More than half of professional golfers have had to stop playing because of their injuries. One-third of PGA players have experienced lower back injuries that lasted more than two weeks. [21] [22] [23]
Stephen W. West, postdoctoral research fellow in the Sport Injury Prevention Research Centre at the University of Calgary, explained, “The physical demands of competitive golf are characterised by long periods (typically over 5 hours) of low/moderate intensity exercise, punctuated by the high speed movements required to accelerate the golf ball to speeds exceeding 160 mph. Successful performance is reliant upon the athlete’s ability to execute a wide range of fine motor skills within the context of very changeable environmental conditions.” [80]
For the casual or recreational player, golf still offers the benefits of sports and athleticism: strength and endurance, flexibility, aerobic fitness, and balance and core stability, because the sport requires walking, strength training, and balance. Carrying his own 25-pound golf bag, the average male golfer can expect to burn about 1,442 calories playing 18 holes. Even using a pushcart for the golf bag results in burning about 1,436 calories over an 18-hole course. [78] [79]
Pro 2: Golf meets the definition of sport and golfers that of athletes by being competitive.
“Golf is a sport. Many people enjoy it on a solely social level and that’s fine. But, first and foremost, it’s a sport where players compete against the course and each other, trying to better previous performances or outplay an opponent,” according to Fergus Bisset, contributing editor of Golf Monthly . [86]
Golf tournaments such as the four Majors can be some of the most difficult contests in all of sports to win. Golfers are not only playing against their opponents but themselves, the golf course itself, and external conditions including the weather. Padraig Harrington, who won multiple Majors, stated, “The test is there for all golfers, all across time. . . . .It’s what we all want to measure our careers.” [88] [89]
Golfers can be competitive as athletes when playing socially and not playing in a tournament. A post at GolfGurls.com stated: “Still, I don’t think of golf as your usual competitive sport. At least not for me. When I play a round of golf my focus is seldom on beating the other players. I actually pay very little attention to anyone’s score but my own. My competition is with my own game: with how I am playing today compared with how I have played yesterday, or the day before. I am always competing with myself: one hole at a time, one round at a time. I am always trying to best my past record, lower my handicap and increase my ability.” [87]
Pro 3: Golf meets the definition of sport and golfers that of athletes by requiring skill to play.
Golf requires coordinated muscle use. The golf swing uses at least 17 muscle groups in the coordinated movement of the hands, wrists, arms, abdomen, and legs, according to a study in the British Medical Journal . Playing golf on a professional level requires athletic ability to walk long distances (4–5 miles per 18-hole course) and hit long drives with consistent depth and aim. [8] [13] [14]
Plus, physical training leads to improvement in a golfer’s performance. In golf, like in other sports, there is a correlation between an athlete’s physical training and improved performance. A 2009 peer-reviewed study found that golfers who focus on balance, flexibility, posture, core stability, strength, power, and cardiovascular training have better results. [8]
Rory McIlroy, World No.1 for 95 weeks (2012–15), credits his training regimen with helping him reach the top spot. Tiger Woods has reportedly bench-pressed as much as 315 pounds. [20]
Golf Educate summarized, “Golf is rated as one of the most difficult sports to play well, and while there are millions of golfers in the US, only 3% of them play at very high skill levels of scratch or better, and only 10% of golfers break 80 regularly. There’s no denying it; golf is hard.” [82]
Pro Quotes
Jentry Barton, national director of fitness at US Sports Camps, stated:
“In the golf swing, your body twists, torques, and turns to create a violent energy. While using the ground as force, it spirally connects your legs, core, and spine to create impact into a tiny white ball…
Now, don’t be fooled. Golf is hard. Even the professionals have days where they can’t get it to go straight. The hardest working athletes still fall, and especially in golf. Golf is not just a challenge of the body, but also of the mind. But do not be mistaken, golf is a sport. The golf swing is a learned, yet athletic move.”
—Jentry Barton, “Believe It or Not Golf Is a Sport,” scga.org, Jan. 23, 2019
Jake Woolf, style writer at GQ , stated:
“The fact that these guys consider themselves athletes at all is evidence of a seismic shift in the landscape. Ultimately, these young guns took a page out of Tiger’s book and literally beat him at his own game, putting as much effort into their core as they do into their chip shots. Though golf may still be considered a leisure sport, the sheer power Rory McIlroy exhibits when driving a ball 350 yards off the tee looks like anything but a walk in the park. (Or, you know, 436 yards.) With the results to prove that fitness leads to wins, this new generation of planking, squatting, deadlifting golfers have finally erased the stigma that golf is just for fat old men.”
—Jake Woolf, “In Praise of Swole Golfers,” gq.com, Aug. 17, 2015
Mario Santos-Davidson, college golfer at Whitman College, stated:
“Golf may seem simple from the outside, but it’s one of the most complicated sports to date. So many factors go into every single shot, that no matter how long you play the sport, no two shots will ever be exactly the same…
Golfers must walk about 5 miles during a typical round, while carrying a 30-pound bag along for the 4 or 5 hour trek. This is not to mention the violence of the swing–twisting and turning your spine 40 times in a day requires some serious agility and athleticism. Hitting a golf ball requires an unbelievable amount of coordination.”
—Mario Santos-Davidson, “6 Reasons That Prove Golf Is a Sport,” Odyssey website, Sep. 20, 2015
Mark Willard, ESPN radio host and columnist for Fore Magazine , stated:
“There is athleticism in trying to hit out of a bunker, plain and simple. Hooking a ball around a tree to get back in the fairway takes athleticism…
Maybe the best evidence is the fact that so many athletes from other sports play golf. In other words, what does a big time athlete do to challenge themselves outside their normal game? They play golf… What is the anatomy of an athlete? An athlete uses his or her body to get competitive juices flowing, release stress and energy, express themselves and have fun. So, that makes golfers athletes. And it makes athletes want to golf.”
—Mark Willard, “Range Tokens: If Golfers Aren’t Athletes, Then Why Do So Many Athletes Play Golf?,” Fore Magazine , Summer 2014
Con 1: Golf does not require enough physical exertion from golfers to meet the definitions of sport or athlete.
Burning 360 calories per hour playing golf without a cart or caddie is far fewer than the number of calories athletes burn per hour in more vigorous sports: 900 in soccer and 727 in football, basketball, and tennis. [9] [29]
Moreover, nearly half of the maximum calories burned while playing golf are from walking the course and carrying the clubs, and the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that walking is not an essential aspect of golf. In PGA Tour, Inc. v. Martin (2001), the justices ruled 7–2 that the pro tour had to allow a golfer with a disability to use a golf cart because it would not “fundamentally alter the nature” of the activity. Using a cart while playing golf reduces the number of calories burned even further, by 42% percent (from 721 to 411 for nine holes). [4] [9]
Professional golfers are sometimes overweight, old, or out of shape, and their caddies carry the equipment for them. There is no running, jumping, or cardiovascular activity in golf. Many pro golfers smoked while playing (Ben Hogan, Arnold Palmer, Fuzzy Zoeller) or both smoked and drank while playing (John Daly). If an activity does not make you break a sweat, or if it can be done while drinking and smoking, then it is not a sport and the player is not an athlete. [73]
When ESPN ranked the athletic difficulty of 60 activities in 2004 based on ten categories such as endurance, agility, and strength, it ranked golf 51, lower than ping-pong and just ahead of roller skating. [31]
Golf is certainly competitive, and it requires skill, but it is simply good exercise and does not require enough physical exertion to be a sport. For elderly male golfers, an 18-hole game is moderate to high intensity; however, the game requires only moderate exercise for middle-aged men and is low intensity for young men. Regardless of age, all golfers perceived their exercise as weak to moderate, which is a far cry from the sweat dripping off the faces of basketball and football players. [81]
Con 2: Golfers are not consistently competitive enough to meet the definitions of sport and athlete.
Golf involves competition, keeping score, and declaring a winner, but those facts alone do not make it a sport and do not make golfers athletes. Spelling bees, poker, and darts are competitions with scores and winners that are sometimes broadcast on the sports network ESPN, but those activities are not sports and the players are not athletes. [30]
The fact that golfers are able to be competitive professionally so far past the age of peak athleticism—which is age 26, according to a June 2011 peer-reviewed study—shows that golf is not competitive enough to be a sport. For example, Tom Watson nearly won one of the biggest tournaments in professional golf, the British Open, at age 59 in 2009. Jack Nicklaus won 11 of his 18 Majors after turning 30. [32] [33]
According to Chris Mile, president of Miles of Golf, “‘Golf’ and ‘Competitive Golf’ are almost two different activities. Both are fun but the competitive part of the game makes it really different. Golf is mostly about being with friends and enjoying the beauty of the game, the exercise, and the challenge. Competitive Golf should have everything that Golf has but with the added twist of beating other players. The addition of this little variation really changes the game.” Golf is frequently played during business meetings or for social events, without much or any competition. By contrast, few players distinguish between “tennis” and “competitive tennis,” because the goal is nearly always for one side to win. [85]
Con 3: Golf requires skill but involves too much happenstance to be considered a sport and its players athletes.
“The more I practice, the luckier I get,” said golfer Jerry Barber (although the quote is frequently attributed to golfer Gary Player). [82]
From avoiding water hazards and sand traps to hoping your ball isn’t carried off by winds or local wildlife, golf is widely influenced by luck. As Gary N. Smith, Fletcher Jones Professor of Economics at Pomona College, explained: “A total of 222 golfers have won at least one of the four majors (Open, Masters, U.S. Open, and PGA Championship). Of these major winners, 140 (63%) never won another major afterward. Even among the best golfers, luck is endemic. There is considerable happenstance in gusts of wind and in fortunate and unfortunate bounces. Sometimes a ball lands on a bank of grass and sticks; sometimes it rolls into a lake or sand trap. Sometimes a ball whistles through a tree; sometimes it bounces off a branch. Sometimes a branch ricochet puts the ball back on the fairway, where the grass is cut short and the ball can be played cleanly; sometimes the ball bounces into foot-high grass.” Rarely if ever is an ace in tennis, a three-point bucket in basketball, or a pitched strikeout in baseball affected by a wind, a wet or dried-out and bumpy playing service, or a freakish happenstance of nature, all of which routinely affect golf and who wins and loses. [90]