A filibuster is a legislative tactic, usually used by the minority party, to block or delay the majority party from voting on a desired piece of legislation; the minority party does so by prolonging debate, “talking the bill to death.” As Encyclopaedia Britannica explains, a filibuster is “used in the U.S. Senate by a minority of the senators—sometimes even a single senator—to delay or prevent parliamentary action by talking so long that the majority either grants concessions or withdraws the bill.” The strategy is only used in the U.S. Senate because “unlike the U.S. House of Representatives , in which rules limit speaking time, the Senate allows unlimited debate on a bill. Speeches can be completely irrelevant to the issue.” The House does allow unlimited speech for delaying or preventing a vote on a bill via a tactic known as the “magic minute”; contrary to the filibuster, which is open all senators, it can only be used by House leadership, such as the House Speaker , Majority Leader, and Minority Leader. [1] [57]
There are several tactics for ending filibusters or making them more difficult. First, three-fifths of U.S. senators (meaning 60 of the 100 senators) could vote to “invoke cloture ,” a parliamentarian procedure that would limit debate and allow for a vote on the issue at hand. Second, the Senate can stay in session late at night, or round-the-clock, to tire those using the filibuster. Perhaps the most famous depiction of a marathon filibuster, and the various tactics used to fight it, is the climactic scene in the classic 1939 movie Mr. Smith Goes to Washington , when the star of the film, an idealistic freshman senator played by Jimmy Stewart , collapses on the Senate floor from exhaustion after speaking for 24 hours. A third method is the so-called “nuclear option,” used in 2013 and 2017 to eliminate the use of the filibuster for presidential executive and judicial appointments and U.S. Supreme Court nominees . The “nuclear option” allows senators to change Senate rules with a simple majority vote (just 51 senators) instead of a supermajority (60 senators). Following this option, senators can kill the filibuster for specific key party platform legislation. But using this option runs the risk of the minority party doing the same thing once it regains the majority, creating a cycle of tit-for-tat actions that undermine Senate rules and traditions and lead to greater dysfunction and partisanship in the chamber. [1] [2] [14] [15]
Interestingly, the word “filibuster” comes from the world of piracy . Derived from Dutch and Spanish, the term first appeared in English in 1591 as “flee-booters,” which would later to people who raided the Caribbean Spanish colonies in the 17th century. The word gained a syllable along the way, and by the 1850s “filibusters” were Americans who traveled to the Spanish West Indies and Central America to encourage revolution. Senate filibusters, then, were “hijacking debate” like pirates hijacking boats. As NPR host Melissa Block explained, “filibustering senators were, by extension, pirates raiding the Congress for their own political gain.” [3] [14]
What do you think?
Explore the ProCon debate
The first instance of “talking a bill to death” actually happened during the very first session of Congress, on September 22, 1789. As Anti-Administration Party Senator William Maclay of Pennsylvania wrote in his journal, the “design of the Virginians and the Carolina gentleman was to talk away the time, so that we could not get the bill passed.” Despite the proto-filibustering, the bill was passed 31-17. [4] [5]
In 1789, both the U.S. House and Senate had a rule allowing for a simple majority to end debate: the “previous question motion.” The House rulebook still has that motion. The Senate eliminated it in 1805 when Vice President Aaron Burr (who had just been indicted for the murder of Alexander Hamilton ) told the Senate to clean up their rulebook, specifically to get rid of this tactic. The Senate did so in 1806, eliminating the Senate’s ability to end debate with a simple majority, thereby enabling the filibuster. [6]
According to the Senate, the term “filibuster” first came into congressional use when Mississippi Democrat Senator Albert Brown noted his “friend standing on the other side of the House filibustering” on January 3, 1853, and when North Carolina Whig Senator George Badger bemoaned “filibustering speeches” in February of the same year. Other sources state “filibuster” didn’t take on its Senate meaning until 1889 or 1890. [3] [4]
The debate over eliminating the filibuster is almost as old as its appearance in the Senate. As early as 1841, Kentucky Whig Senator Henry Clay , frustrated with filibustering Democrats, threatened to limit debate. Alabama Democrat Senator William King countered that Clay might as well “make his arrangements at his boarding house for the [entire] winter” in preparation for even longer debates to maintain the filibuster. [4]
But as the U.S. Senate grew in members, so did the amount of work it had to do, and so too did frustrations with the filibuster, as long speeches could derail work for days. President Woodrow Wilson made his displeasure known when, at the end of the 64th Congress on March 4, 1917, the Senate’s work remained undone:
Senate of the United States is the only legislative body in the world which cannot act when its majority is ready for action. A little group of willful men, representing no opinion but their own, have rendered the great government of the United States helpless and contemptible. [4] [7] [8] [9]
At Wilson’s urging, in a special congressional session, Senate Rule 22 was adopted on March 8, 1917. The rule meant that senators could file a motion to invoke cloture , which would prompt a vote on whether to end the debate two business days after the motion was filed, allowing up to 30 additional hours of debate. Two-thirds of the Senate was required to end a filibuster with cloture until 1974 when the rule was changed to only three-fifths (meaning 60 U.S. senators). If the motion is approved during the cloture vote, then cloture has been invoked and the Senate will vote on the item in question without further delay and debate. [4] [7] [8] [9]
The first invocation of cloture occurred on November 15, 1919, and ended debate on the Treaty of Versailles . Between 1917 and June 17, 2025, U.S. Senators have filed 2,986 cloture motions , voted on cloture 2,421 times, and successfully invoked cloture in 1,700 cases. At first used sparingly, cloture has become a more popular tool; during the 113th Congress (2013-2014), its use jumped to 187 from 41 clotures in the 112th Congress (2011-2012). It’s use hit a high of 336 clotures in the 117th Congress (2021-2022). [10] [11]
The longest individual filibuster on record occurred in 1957, when U.S. Senator Strom Thurmond of South Carolina talked for 24 hours and 18 minutes as part of an unsuccessful attempt by Southern senators to obstruct civil rights legislation. Speaking longer was New Jersey U.S. Senator Cory Booker , who spoke for 25 hours and five minutes, delivering the longest Senate speech in U.S. history, from March 31 to April 1, 2025. His speech, however, was not a filibuster (there was no specific legislation being blocked)—Booker spoke in general protest of President Donald Trump and his policies. Also in 2025, on July 2, U.S. House Minority Leader Hakeem Jeffries delivered the longest speech in the history of the House of Representatives via the “magic minute” option; he spoke for 8 hours and 44 minutes in opposition to President Trump’s massive tax and spending bill that was signed into law on July 4. [1] [49] [58]
Key to the current debate over filibusters is the political parity that exists in the U.S. Congress. With the Senate almost evenly split between Democrats and Republicans , at a time when the parties share little ideological overlap and seldom agree on anything, the filibuster has become a prime tool for hindering the presidential and congressional agendas of the majority party, whose control over the Senate is slight, tenuous, and far from a large mandate, making legislation almost impossible to pass. [12]
Additionally, senators no longer have to actually talk for hours to filibuster. Sometimes just the threat of a filibuster (called a “virtual filibuster” or “silent filibuster”) is enough to block legislation. William Galston, Cofounder of the Congressional reform group No Labels, describes the tactic as a “sort of a ‘Look ma, no hands’ way of avoiding accountability” and the physical effort requiring senators to talk for hours. [47] [48]
Another frequently discussed option is to change the threshold for invoking cloture from 60 to a higher or lower number of senators in order to strengthen or weaken the filibuster. One version is an “inverted filibuster” in which only 41 votes (instead of 60) would be needed to invoke cloture and end a filibuster, thereby shifting the burden to the dissenting senators instead of the senators promoting the legislation in question. Also suggested is to require three-fifths of “present and voting” senators to invoke cloture and end a filibuster instead of the current requirement of three-fifths of “duly chosen and sworn” senators, many of whom may not be present or voting, thereby making it easier to kill a filibuster. [14] [16]
Unfamiliarity with the filibuster makes it difficult for the public to imagine how to reform the Senate procedure. According to a Navigator Research poll in March 2024, 60 percent of those surveyed believed getting rid of the filibuster would have a positive impact, 26 percent believed it would have no impact or weren’t sure, and 14 percent believed it would have a negative impact. However, most of the people polled knew little about filibusters: only 21 percent said they understood them “very well,” 40 percent said they understood them “somewhat well,” and 39 percent said “not well” at all. [50]
So, should the U.S. Senate keep the filibuster? Explore the debate below.
Pro 1: Filibusters promote compromise and protect the voice and views of the minority party.
The filibuster provides a way for minority opinions (and therefore the voices of the constituents of the minority parties) to be heard on the Senate floor, fulfilling the senators’ mandate to govern. [17]
“Far from being simply a weapon of obstruction, the filibuster actually forces compromise. The framers designed the Senate to be a consensus-driven body. If a majority party knows they need to garner 60 votes to end debate on a bill, the necessity of working across the aisle, negotiating, and finding areas of agreement becomes imperative, rather than optional. Without the filibuster as a tool of negotiation, the Senate becomes little more than a smaller version of the House of Representatives where legislation reflects the priorities of the majority, with little regard to concerns of the minority,” explained Rachel Bovard of the Heritage Foundation. [18]
Without the filibuster, the crucial tradition of debate is quashed, leaving the majority party to enact its will without checks or balances. As Thomas Jipping of the Heritage Foundation explained, “World history is full of examples of governments that unless they have limits and controls and checks get really out of control. And the extended debate, the filibuster, that’s part of that system of checks and balances. So it’s a very important part of limiting government at least in the Senate…. [A]fter the 2020 election, the Senate is 50/50. Even before that, it was very closely divided. That narrow majority should not be able to force its will on the very large minority anytime that it wants. So it’s part of that design for our government and I think it’s a very important one.” [17]
Protecting the filibuster is also a case of “what comes around, goes around.” While one party has a slim majority, they may want to eliminate the filibuster to enact their policies. However, as Senator John Thune (R-SD) pointedly remarked, “I encourage my colleagues to think about that time when they will be in the minority again – and to ask themselves whether they really want to eliminate their voices, and the voices of their constituents, in future policy battles.” [19]
Pro 2: Filibusters protect the intended purpose of the U.S. Senate: purposeful debate.
The intentionally slow movement of legislation through the Senate not only creates a mandated space for deliberation, but it also allows American citizens to read the bills and communicate their policy views to their Senators, who can then write and pass legislation that best represents the will of their constituents. [20]
Eliminating the filibuster would fast-track legislation, making the Senate operate like the House, which is neither what the chamber is intended to do nor a productive part of the democratic process. [20]
As Supreme Court Justice Joseph Story wrote in 1833, “[Division of legislative power into two houses] is of little or no intrinsic value, unless it is so organized, that each can operate, as a real check upon undue and rash legislation. If each [chamber] is substantially framed upon the same plan, the advantages of the division are shadowy and imaginative; the visions and speculations of the brain, and not the walking thoughts of statesmen, or patriots…. Each will act, as the other does; and each will be led by the same common influence of ambition, or intrigue, or passion, to the same disregard of the public interests, and the same indifference to, and prostration of private rights. It will only be a duplication of the evils of oppression and rashness, with a duplication of obstructions to effective redress. In this view, the organization of the senate becomes of inestimable value.… No system could, in this respect, be more admirably contrived to ensure due deliberation and inquiry, and just results in all matters of legislation.” [21]
According to U.S. Senate history, George Washington remarked to Thomas Jefferson that the Senate was created to “cool” House legislation, as a saucer cools hot tea. To extend the metaphor, without the Senate and legislative tools such as the filibuster, the country could be harmed by “hot,” rash legislation. [23]
Pro 3: Filibusters are an important safeguard against political extremism and corporate influence.
The Senate has always purposefully been the slower chamber of Congress, the one that “was not going to simply ride popular waves when considering legislative action.” The filibuster “frankly is one of the last safeguards against extremist legislators from either side of the aisle pushing through laws that the vast majority of the country would oppose,” according to Pete Weichlein, CEO of The Former Members of Congress Association. [24]
Eliminating “the filibuster would only ramp up partisan acrimony and increase the level of fear and anxiety around American elections,” argued David French, senior editor of The Dispatch. The filibuster protects against both minoritarian rule, in which the minority party takes and keeps control contrary to the wishes of the majority of citizens, and majoritarian domination, in which the voices and liberties of the minority of citizens could be eliminated. In both cases, the more extreme end of each party would likely be in control, rather than those willing to work across the aisle. While working through compromise may be more difficult, that is the work of democracy. [25]
David Super, law professor at Georgetown University, explained another advantage of maintaining the current rule: “The filibuster also serves as a crucial counterweight against big-money politics. Holding a majority to block legislation backed by the corporate elite is difficult when millions of dollars in campaign contributions tempt legislators to vote with irresponsible banks, avaricious petrochemical companies or reckless lumber interests. Forty-one votes to block radical deregulation [by preventing a block of 60 senators from enacting cloture and ending a filibuster] is a much more achievable goal.” Thus, the filibuster protects citizen voices against powerful corporations and unscrupulous Senators who might bow to the influence of corporate lobbyists rather than represent their constituents faithfully. [26]
Con 1: Filibusters promote obstructionism and partisanship, allowing the minority party to rule without a national mandate.
The 117th Senate (2021–2023) was composed of 50 Republicans, 48 Democrats, and 2 Independents who caucus with the Democrats, making the Senate split evenly in terms of broad politics. The tiebreaker was Vice President Kamala Harris, a Democrat. [27] [28] [29]
However, the 50 liberal senators represented 41.5 million more Americans than the 50 conservative senators. [27] [28] [29]
Because ending a filibuster requires a 60-senator majority vote, just 41 conservative senators (the number of senators needed to protect a filibuster) in the 117th Senate who represented just over 20 percent of the American population could kill any and all legislation brought by the party voted in to control the Senate, House, and White House. This dynamic continued into the 119th Congress (2025–2027), which has 53 Republicans, 45 Democrats, and 2 Independents who caucus with the Democrats. [27] [28] [29]
One estimate predicts that by 2040, about 30 percent of the American population will live in 35 states represented by 70 senators, while about 70 percent of the population will live in 15 states represented by 30 senators. That 30 percent will be older, less racially diverse, and more rural than the majority of the country. Therefore, the possibility of a stark minority of senators filibustering and killing legislation supported by the majority of the country only stands to grow worse. [30]
That dynamic is exacerbated when the venom of partisanship is factored into the equation. “We’re finally seeing, I think, a level of frustration, over the misuse of the filibuster, not as an infrequently applied tool by a minority on an issue about which they feel very, very strongly, but as a cynical weapon of mass obstruction … And it means if you don’t have more than 60 of your own party members, you’re just dramatically limited in what you can do in policy terms. And it’s basically because you have a minority party that’s not looking to solve problems, but to figure out how to block anything of significance in ... [the majority party’s] agenda, and make sure problems fester so that they have more traction to gain political advantage,” according to Norm Ornstein, political scientist at the American Enterprise Institute. [31]
Con 2: Filibusters prevent meaningful debate and slow the already slow work of the U.S. Senate.
In 1957, Senator Strom Thurmond (then D-SC, though he would switch to the Republican party in 1964) filibustered for 24 hours and 18 minutes on August 28 and 29, the longest filibuster on record. Thurmond spent valuable Senate time reciting the Declaration of Independence , the Bill of Rights , and President George Washington’s farewell address , among other historical documents and state election laws. The effort was in vain: no senator changed their vote, and the act passed 60-15 a mere two hours after Thurmond stopped speaking. [32] [33] [34]
In September 1981, Senator William Proxmire (D-WI) filibustered for 16 hours and 12 minutes (the fifth-longest filibuster), halting debate about raising the debt ceiling, an action he opposed. His filibuster kept the senate chambers open overnight, costing taxpayers “$47,500 for the extra Congressional Record, $6,500 in police overtime and $10,500 in building maintenance costs,” over $64,500 in 1981 dollars (about $228,612 in 2025 dollars). Those figures did not include “incalculable extra man hours from personnel on fixed salaries.” The Senate passed the debt ceiling increase the next day in a 64-34 vote. [32] [35]
Moreover, a January 2022 study found that not only do filibusters not increase meaningful debate as defenders claim, but they serve to dampen debate. The study showed that in 2007 when Senate Republicans increased use of the filibuster, there was a fairly immediate 14 percent decline in debate. Three legislative sessions later, debate had declined 28 percent. [36] [37]
Study co-author William Howell, Chair of the Political Science department at the University of Chicago, explained the filibuster use “was not because those who were using the filibuster were particularly interested in scrutinizing the merits of policy changes to a greater extent, it’s because they wanted to block policy change. What they wanted to do was grind things to a halt.” [36] [37]
Con 3: Filibusters are a Jim Crow relic used to block meaningful legislation.
President Barack Obama, in his July 30, 2020, eulogy for Representative John Lewis (D-GA), referred to the filibuster as “another Jim Crow relic.” [38]
Between 1917 and 1995, half of the 30 bills killed in the Senate, despite support from majorities in the House and Senate and White House support, were civil rights protections including those to ban poll taxes, employment and housing discrimination, and lynching. [39] [40]
In fact, an anti-lynching bill, despite over 240 attempts in 122 years, was not passed until March 7, 2022, when it passed the Senate unanimously. [41] [42] [43]
Southern Democrats, unable to kill legislation with votes, delayed civil rights progress for years with filibusters, even though the legislation was supported by a majority of Americans, including those living in the South. [44]
The threat of filibuster has also killed several contemporary initiatives that disproportionately impact communities of color, including climate change, universal healthcare, and gun control. [45]
For example, the American Clean Energy and Security Act passed the House but was never brought up in the Senate because the the bill would be quashed by filibuster. The act “would have set new renewable fuel standards and established a cap-and-trade system for reducing greenhouse gas emissions.” [45]
Kevin Kruse, historian of race and American politics at Princeton University, stated that the filibuster has “been a tool used overwhelmingly by racists … It is the preferred choice of Southern conservatives, in whatever era and whatever party, who are trying to slow down civil rights and trying to deny equal protection for African Americans.” [46]