Table of Contents Ask the Chatbot
Although standardized tests have been a part of American education since the mid-1800s, their use skyrocketed after the 2002 No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB) mandated annual, standardized testing of reading and math proficiency in all 50 states. However, despite the renewed emphasis on teaching and schools, problems continued to plague American education. Some observers even began to blame standardized testing itself as a source of these problems, as the newly regulated schools began lowering standards and eroding the quality of teaching in an urgency to “teach to the test” in order to “make the grade” mandated by government.
Standardized tests are defined as “any test that’s administered, scored, and interpreted in a standard, predetermined manner,” according to by W. James Popham, former president of the American Educational Research Association. The tests often have multiple-choice questions that can be quickly graded by automated test scoring machines. Some tests also incorporate open-ended questions that require human grading. [5] [6] [7]
High-stakes achievement tests have provoked the most controversy. These assessments carry important consequences for students, teachers, and schools: low scores can prevent a student from progressing to the next grade level or lead to teacher firings and school closures, while high scores ensure continued federal and local funding and are used to reward teachers and administrators with bonuses. [6] [8] [9] [10]
Early History
It is difficult to say how and where the first standardized exams arose, but they played a significant and early role in Chinese history, among the ruling class. The famed “Eight-Legged Essay,” so-called because of the essay’s eight parts, became a fixture of the Chinese empire in the Ming Dynasty (1368-1644); it was a standard part of civil service tests for government positions that tested the applicants’ rote learning of Confucian philosophy , and it was used until 1901, when it was roundly criticized for hindering Chinese originality and contributing to the country’s cultural stagnation and backwardness. Written exams became popular in the West as well, especially due to technological innovation. “In Europe, the invention of the printing press [in the 15th century] and modern paper manufacturing fueled the growth of written exams,” writes education columnist Jay Mathews. [15] [16] [91]
Further technological development spurred still a greater need for testing and standardized exams. The Industrial Revolution (mid-1700s to the early 1900s) encouraged the education of school-age farmhands and factory workers. Standardized examinations enabled the newly expanded student body to be tested efficiently. [15] [16] [17]
In the mid-1800s, Boston school reformers Horace Mann and Samuel Gridley Howe , modeling their efforts on the centralized Prussian school system, introduced standardized testing to Boston schools. The new tests were devised to test a student’s knowledge and to provide a “single standard by which to judge and compare the output of each school.” In other words, as education professor William Reese has explained, the goal was twofold: to garner both “precise measurements of school achievement,” for assessing the quality of schools and their teaching, and “positive information, in black and white,” on what exactly students knew. Boston’s program was soon adopted by school systems nationwide. [18] [96]
Concerns about excessive testing were voiced as early as 1906, when the New York State Department of Education advised the state legislature that “it is a very great and more serious evil to sacrifice systematic instruction and a comprehensive view of the subject for the scrappy and unrelated knowledge gained by students who are persistently drilled in the mere answering of questions issued by the Education Department or other governing bodies.” This criticism of standardized testing mirrored the criticism in China of the rigid Eight-Legged Exam: such testing stifled creativity, stunted real learning, and encouraged the mere memorization of answers to pass exams. [19]
The Kansas Silent Reading Test (1914-15) is the earliest known published multiple-choice test, developed by Frederick J. Kelly, a Kansas school director. Kelly created the test to reduce “time and effort” in administration and scoring. World War I (1914-18) also played a key role in popularizing standardized testing in the United States. Given to new recruits, the Army’s “intelligence tests,” developed by Princeton psychologist Carl Brigham, were deeply biased, reflecting the prejudices and racism of the day. “During World War I,” writes John Rosales and Tim Walker, “standardized tests helped place 1.5 million soldiers in units segregated by race and by test scores.” [20] [74]
This wartime emphasis on standardized tests influenced the founding of the Scholastic Aptitude Test, the SAT exam, in 1926. Created by Carl Brigham for the College Board for the expansion of access to higher education, the SAT became a standard exam for acceptance into college in the post-World War II era. “In 1926, a group of 8,000 students took the SAT,” writes historian Genevieve Carlton, and “by the 1950s, half a million college-bound seniors sat for the SAT every year.” (The ACT, the American College Testing exam, was established as a rival of the SAT in 1959.) [92]
In 1934, International Business Machines Corporation ( IBM ) hired teacher and inventor Reynold B. Johnson (best known for creating the world’s first commercial computer disk drive ) to create a production model of his prototype test scoring machine. The IBM 805, announced in 1938 and marketed until 1963, graded answer sheets by detecting the electrical current flowing through graphite pencil marks. The contemporary use of No. 2 pencils for exams is a historical holdover from this period, since modern scanners’ optical mark recognition (OMR) technology can recognize marks made by pens and pencils alike. [21] [22] [23] [24]
Modern Testing Begins
The modern testing movement began with the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), enacted by President Lyndon Johnson in 1965, which included testing and accountability provisions in an effort to raise standards and make education more equitable. [19]
The 1983 release of A Nation at Risk: The Imperative for Educational Reform , a report by President Ronald Reagan ’s National Commission on Excellence in Education, warned of a crisis in American education and an urgent need to raise academic standards. The report’s portrayal of an education system that had “lost sight of the basic purposes of schooling, and of the high expectations and disciplined effort needed to attain them” rallied reform advocates to press for stricter accountability measures, including increased testing. [25] [26] [27]
Successive administrations attempted to implement national school reform following the release of A Nation at Risk . George H.W. Bush ’s America 2000 plan (announced in 1991) aimed to achieve in nine years the world’s best math and science test scores, all by the turn of the millennium, but it became mired in the U.S. Congress. President Bill Clinton ’s Goals 2000 Act and Improving America’s Schools Act (IASA), passed in 1994, had the same aim of making American students the top in the world in math and science by 2000. Many of its principles reflected an outcome-based approach to education, which has been criticized for over-emphasizing standardized test scores, leading to the negative consequences associated with high-stakes testing, such as narrowing the curriculum and “teaching to the test” at the expense of art, music, or social studies. Clinton’s 1997 Voluntary National Test initiative, which provided standardized benchmarks for student performance, languished in Congress and was abandoned after $15 million and over two years had been spent on its development. [28] [29]
“No Child Left Behind” and “Race to the Top”
Clinton’s Goals 2000 Act is often seen as the precursor to President George W. Bush ’s No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB), which passed with bipartisan support (381-41) in the U.S. House of Representatives , 87-10 in the U.S. Senate ) and was signed into law by Bush on January 8, 2002. The legislation, modeled on Bush’s education policy as governor of Texas , mandated annual testing in reading and math (and later science) in grades 3-8 and again in grade 10. If schools did not show sufficient Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP), they faced sanctions and the possibility of being taken over by the state or closed. NCLB required that 100 percent of U.S. students be “proficient” on state reading and math tests by 2014, which was regarded as an impossible target by many testing opponents. The difficult targets, and the severe penalties possible if the school targets were not met, led to “gaming the system,” such as “teaching to the test” and the “creative reclassification” of high school dropouts as “transfer students” to mask the negative metrics and to prevent schools and school districts from being punished. [28] [30] [31] [32] [33] [34] [93]
According to the Pew Center on the States, annual state spending on standardized tests rose from $423 million before NCLB to almost $1.1 billion in 2008 (a 160 percent increase compared to a 19.22 percent increase in inflation over the same period). Combined state and federal government spending on education totaled $600 billion per year, while all-time philanthropic contributions to U.S. education totaled less than $10 billion, according to a 2011 statement by tech maverick and philanthropist Bill Gates . [35] [36]
On February 17, 2009, President Barack Obama ’s Race to the Top program was signed into law, inviting states to compete for $4.35 billion in extra funding based on the strength of their student test scores. On March 13, 2010, Obama proposed an overhaul of Bush’s No Child Left Behind, promising further incentives to states if they develop improved assessments tied more closely to state standards, and emphasizing other indicators like pupil attendance, graduation rates, and learning climate in addition to test scores. Testing opponents have decried both initiatives for their continued reliance on test scores, a complaint Obama seemed to echo on March 28, 2011, when he said: “Too often what we have been doing is using these tests to punish students or to, in some cases, punish schools.” [37] [38] [39]
D.C. and Los Angeles Controversies
The 2010 documentary Waiting for Superman gave the testing and accountability movement a nationally recognized spokesperson in Michelle Rhee, then-Chancellor of Washington, D.C , public schools. Rhee, appointed by D.C. Mayor Adrian Fenty in June 2007, became a lightning rod for testing opponents after she enacted a strict policy of teacher and school accountability based on standardized test scores. By the time she resigned her post in Oct. 2010, she had fired 600 teachers and dozens of principals, closed 23 schools, and introduced $25,000 bonuses to teachers receiving high evaluations, based in part on standardized test results. [40] [41] [42]
D.C.’s student test scores rose under Rhee’s reforms, but in March 2011, a USA Today report uncovered scoring irregularities (high numbers of answers that had been erased and replaced with correct answers) in 103 D.C. public schools during the 2008-2010 school years. Rhee responded by saying “the possible misguided actions of a few individuals do not cloud the incredible achievements of the majority of hard working educators who serve our children” and touted nation-leading gains by D.C. students on the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP). [43] [44]
Despite claims by D.C. public school officials that the anomalies were in fact limited to one school, a confidential Jan. 2009 memo uncovered in April 2013 revealed that the problems may have been more widespread. The memo, prepared by an outside analyst hired by Rhee, noted that 191 teachers in 70 schools were “implicated in possible testing infractions” in 2008 alone. Nearly all the teachers at one D.C. elementary school “had students whose test papers showed high numbers of wrong-to-right erasures,” according to USA Today . However, on January 7, 2013, the U.S. Department of Education’s Office of Inspector General said an investigation had found no evidence of widespread cheating on the D.C. Comprehensive Assessment System tests from 2008-2010. The cheating scandal continued after Rhee left her position. The Washington Post reported in April 2013 that 18 D.C. public school teachers were found to have committed “‘critical’ violations of test security” in 2012. [45] [46] [47]
In August 2010, the Los Angeles Times spurred a national debate when the newspaper published the names of about 6,000 Los Angeles elementary school teachers (grades 3-5), alongside calculations of their students’ gains and losses on standardized tests during the school year, in a publicly searchable database. Known as the “value added” method of evaluating teacher effectiveness, it has been mandated by several hundred school districts in some 20 states. For example, up to 40 percent of New York teachers’ evaluations were tied to value-added test score analyses, as of the 2011-2012 school year. The Los Angeles Times story was simultaneously praised for transparency about teachers’ scores and scorned for reducing teachers to one number among many evaluative methods. [48] [49] [50] [86]
NCLB Goals Questioned
On March 9, 2011, U.S. Education Secretary Arne Duncan told Congress that 82 percent of American schools could fail to meet NCLB’s goal of 100 percent proficiency on standardized tests by 2014. Duncan proposed reforming NCLB to “impose a much tighter definition of success” that supports “our fundamental aspiration that every single student can learn, achieve and succeed.” [51]
Individual states have cast similar doubts on their ability to satisfy NCLB’s Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) goals. A 2008 study published in the peer-reviewed journal Science forecast “nearly 100 percent failure” of California schools to meet AYP in 2014. The primary reason for failure, said the study, was the poor results on standardized tests by English Language Learners and children in low-income families. [52]
In 2015, parents staged an “opt-out movement” across the country in which parents did not allow their children to be included in standardized testing, and children as young as 11 were protesting testing. The movement coincided with more rigorous Common Core aligned testing that parents thought too difficult and teachers interpreted as a top-down intervention without sufficient teacher input. [87]
The 2019 Nation’s Report Card (National Assessment of Educational Progress) reported that fourth- and eighth-grade reading and math scores had remained largely the same for a decade, despite stronger academic standards. In 2019, only 35 percent of fourth graders were proficient in reading and 41 percent were proficient in math, while 34 percent of eighth graders were proficient in reading and 34% in math. [53]
COVID-19 Interrupts Testing
On March 20, 2020, Education Secretary Betsy DeVos announced that states could cancel standardized testing for the 2019-2020 school year due to the COVID-19 (coronavirus) pandemic -related school closures. As DeVos stated, “Students need to be focused on staying healthy and continuing to learn. Teachers need to be able to focus on remote learning and other adaptations. Neither students nor teachers need to be focused on high-stakes tests during this difficult time. Students are simply too unlikely to be able to perform their best in this environment.” [54]
On November 25, 2020, the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) announced that National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) reading and math tests would be postponed until 2022 in light of the ongoing pandemic. The tests usually take place every two years and were scheduled for 2021 for fourth- and eighth-grade students. [55]
The Biden Administration announced on February 22, 2021, that states must resume annual math and reading standardized testing in spring 2021. A letter to state school chiefs and governors stated that it is “vitally important that parents, educators, and the public have access to data on student learning and success.” [85]
Post-pandemic Testing
Standardized testing scores suffered after the pandemic. The tests given in the fall of 2022 show the lowest scores in math since 1990 and the lowest in reading since 2003 for 13-year-olds on the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP). Experts are split on the gravity of the results, with some worried about the decline and what it means for students’ advancement while others brushed off the scores as not correlating to what was taught in class. [90]
A February 7, 2024, Forbes report found that students in Massachusetts , Utah , New Jersey , New Hampshire , and Connecticut maintained the highest scores from fourth through eighth grade. Mississippi , Alabama , West Virginia , New Mexico , and Oklahoma showed sharp declines in scores from fourth to eighth grade. The authors point to “rigorous academic standards, adequate funding, student-to-teacher ratios, professional development and successful education policies and reforms” as common denominators in states with high scores, while states with lower scores suffered “lower socioeconomic status” that leads to “challenges such as resource allocation to education or limited resources.” [89]
The 2024 NAEP results in fourth-grade math showed minor improvement from 2022 (up three points), but scores had not yet rebounded to pre-pandemic rates. Overall, only 39 percent of fourth graders performed at or above the NAEP “proficient” level in math. Eighth-grade math scores remained at 2022 levels, which were lower than pre-pandemic scores. Overall, only 28 percent of eighth graders performed at or above the NAEP “proficient” level on math. [94]
Reading scores for both fourth and eighth graders continued to decline post-pandemic (down two points for each), with only 31 percent of fourth graders and 30 percent of eighth graders performing at or above the NAEP “proficient” level. [95]
So, do standardized tests improve education? Explore the debate below.
Pros and Cons at a Glance
PROS
CONS
Pro 1: Standardized tests offer an objective measurement of education. Read More.
Con 1: Standardized tests only determine which students are good at taking tests, ignoring skills like creative thinking and problem-solving. Read More.
Pro 2: Standardized tests help students in marginalized groups. Read More.
Con 2: Standardized tests are racist, classist, and sexist. Read More.
Pro 3: Standardized tests scores are good indicators of college and job success. Read More.
Con 3: Standardized tests scores are not predictors of future success. Read More.
Pro 4: Standardized tests are useful metrics for teacher evaluations. Read More.
Con 4: Standardized tests are unfair metrics for teacher evaluations. Read More.
Pro 1: Standardized tests offer an objective measurement of education.
Teachers’ grading practices are naturally uneven and subjective. An A in one class may be a C in another. Teachers also have conscious or unconscious biases for a favorite student or against a rowdy student, for example. Standardized tests offer students a unified measure of their knowledge without these subjective differences. [56]
“At their core, standardized exams are designed to be objective measures. They assess students based on a similar set of questions, are given under nearly identical testing conditions, and are graded by a machine or blind reviewer. They are intended to provide an accurate, unfiltered measure of what a student knows,” says Aaron Churchill, Ohio Research Director for the Thomas B. Fordham Institute. [56]
Frequently states or local jurisdictions employ psychometricians to ensure tests are fair across populations of students. Mark Moulon, CEO at Pythias Consulting and psychometrician, offers an example: “What’s cool about psychometrics is that it will flag stuff that a human would never be able to notice. I remember a science test that had been developed in California and it asked about earthquakes. But the question was later used in a test that was administered in New England. When you try to analyze the New England kids with the California kids, you would get a differential item functioning flag because the California kids were all over the subject of earthquakes, and the kids in Vermont had no idea about earthquakes.” [57]
With problematic questions removed, or adapted for different populations of students, standardized tests offer the best objective measure of what students have learned. Taking that information, schools can determine areas for improvement. As Bryan Nixon, former Head of School, noted, “When we receive standardized test data at Whitby, we use it to evaluate the effectiveness of our education program. We view standardized testing data as not only another set of data points to assess student performance, but also as a means to help us reflect on our curriculum. When we look at Whitby’s assessment data, we can compare our students to their peers at other schools to determine what we’re doing well within our educational continuum and where we need to invest more time and resources.” [58]
Pro 2: Standardized tests help students in marginalized groups.
“If I don’t have testing data to make sure my child’s on the right track, I’m not able to intervene and say there is a problem and my child needs more. And the community can’t say this school is doing well, this teacher needs help to improve, or this system needs new leadership…. It’s really important to have a statewide test because of the income disparity that exists in our society. Black and Brown excellence is real, but… it is unfair to say that just by luck of birth that a child born in [a richer section of town] is somehow entitled to a higher-quality education… Testing is a tool for us to hold the system accountable to make sure our kids have what they need,” explains Keri Rodrigues, Co-founder of the National Parents Union. [59]
Advocates for marginalized groups of students, whether by race, learning disability, or other difference, can use testing data to prove a problem exists and to help solve the problem via more funding, development of programs, or other solutions. Civil rights education lawsuits wherein a group is suing a local or state government for better education almost always use testing data. [61]
Sheryl Lazarus, Director of the National Center on Educational Outcomes at the University of Minnesota, states, “a real plus of these assessments is that… they have led to improvements in access to instruction for students with disabilities and English learners… Inclusion of students with disabilities and English learners in summative tests used for accountability allows us to measure how well the system is doing for these students, and then it is possible to fill in gaps in instructional opportunity.” [60]
A letter signed by 12 civil rights organizations including the NAACP and the American Association of University Women, explains, “Data obtained through some standardized tests are particularly important to the civil rights community because they are the only available, consistent, and objective source of data about disparities in educational outcomes, even while vigilance is always required to ensure tests are not misused. These data are used to advocate for greater resource equity in schools and more fair treatment for students of color, low-income students, students with disabilities, and English learners… [W]e cannot fix what we cannot measure. And abolishing the tests or sabotaging the validity of their results only makes it harder to identify and fix the deep-seated problems in our schools.” [62]
Pro 3: Standardized tests scores are good indicators of college and job success.
Standardized tests can promote and offer evidence of academic rigor, which is invaluable in college as well as in students’ careers. Matthew Pietrafetta, founder of Academic Approach, argues that the “tests create gravitational pull toward higher achievement.” [65]
Elaine Riordan, senior communications professional at Actively Learn, states, “creating learning environments that lead to higher test scores is also likely to improve students’ long-term success in college and beyond.… Recent research suggests that the competencies that the SAT, ACT, and other standardized tests are now evaluating are essential not just for students who will attend four-year colleges but also for those who participate in CTE [career and technical education] programs or choose to seek employment requiring associate degrees and certificates ... all of these students require the same level of academic mastery to be successful after high school graduation.” [66]
Standardized test scores have long been correlated with better college and life outcomes. As Dan Goldhaber, Director of the Center for Analysis of Longitudinal Data in Education Research, and Umut Özek, senior researcher at the American Institutes for Research, explain, “students who score one standard deviation higher on math tests at the end of high school have been shown to earn 12% more annually, or $3,600 for each year of work life in 2001.… Similarly … test scores are significantly correlated not only with educational attainment and labor market outcomes (employment, work experience, choice of occupation), but also with risky behavior (teenage pregnancy, smoking, participation in illegal activities).” [67]
Pro 4: Standardized tests are useful metrics for teacher evaluations.
While grades and other measures are useful for teacher evaluations, standardized tests provide a consistent measure across classrooms and schools. Individual school administrators, school districts, and the state can compare teachers using test scores to show how each teacher has helped students master core concepts. [63]
Timothy Hilton, a high school social studies teacher in South Central Los Angeles, states, “No self-respecting teacher would use a single student grade on a single assignment as a final grade for the entirety of a course, so why would we rely on one source of information in the determination of a teacher’s overall quality? The more data that can be provided, the more accurate the teacher evaluation decisions will end up being. Teacher evaluations should incorporate as many pieces of data as possible. Administration observation, student surveys, student test scores, professional portfolios, and on and on. The more data that is used, the more accurate the picture it will paint.” [64]