The word sanctuary has been used since the 14th century. It can mean many things, including a religious place of worship, a place of refuge and protection, and a refuge for wildlife where predators are controlled and hunting is illegal. The word has also played a controversial role in American politics in recent years, specifically with the rise of the term sanctuary city . Although there is no official legal definition of sanctuary city , the term generally refers to towns, cities, or counties that welcome undocumented immigrants and decline to cooperate completely with federal detention requests related to illegal migrants, often with a “don’t ask, don’t tell” policy. There are over 200 sanctuary jurisdictions (cities, counties, and states) in the United States; the largest sanctuary cities in the U.S. are New York City, Los Angeles, and Chicago. [2] [47] [49] [50]
The first sanctuary city in the United States is believed to have been Berkeley , California. In 1971, the city declared itself a safe haven for U.S. sailors resisting the Vietnam War . Additional sanctuary cities grew from the Sanctuary Movement of the late 1980s and early 1990s, in which religious congregations began helping undocumented Salvadorian and Guatemalan families settle in the United States. The congregations acted in direct defiance of U.S. immigration authorities, who denied over 90 percent of asylum requests by immigrants fleeing violence in El Salvador and Guatemala . The sanctuary activists believed that the federal government was breaking international and domestic refugee laws. [1] [2] [48] [49]
Los Angeles was the first large city to enact sanctuary policies, focusing on undocumented immigrants already in the United States. The chief of police enacted Special Order No. 40 on Nov. 27, 1979, stating that police officers should not inquire about immigration status and should provide city services to everyone equally. San Francisco followed suit, passing the “City of Refuge” resolution in 1985 and “City of Refuge” ordinance in 1989, which required that all city employees stop immigration policing and provide city services to all residents regardless of immigration status. [2] [12] [29]
According to the Center for Immigration Studies, as of January 7, 2025, there were 13 states and hundreds of cities and counties with some sort of sanctuary laws that limit cooperation with federal immigration authorities. In response to increasing numbers of sanctuary cities, at least 12 states banned sanctuary city policies. There are no federal laws against sanctuary policies, but, while campaigning for his second term, President Trump stated he would “ask Congress to pass a law outlawing sanctuary cities nationwide, and … demand the full weight of the federal government on any jurisdiction that refuses to cooperate” with ICE. [22] [24] [25] [26] [41]
During his first term in office, Trump held that the federal government should be able to withhold funds from sanctuary cities for their noncompliance with federal laws, however that policy was struck down by federal judges. On day one of his second administration, January 20, 2025, Trump signed an executive order , titled “Protecting the American People Against Invasion,” to “ensure that so-called ‘sanctuary’ jurisdictions, which seek to interfere with the lawful exercise of Federal law enforcement operations, do not receive access to Federal funds.” [22] [27] [28] [30] [31] [33] [34] [35] [41] [46]
After Trump’s Attorney General Pam Bondi was sworn into office on Feb. 5, 2024, she quickly ordered an end to Department of Justice grants to jurisdictions that “unlawfully interfere with federal law enforcement.” Two days later, the Trump administration sued Illinois, Cook County, and the city of Chicago, alleging:
The conduct of officials in Chicago and Illinois minimally enforcing — and oftentimes affirmatively thwarting — federal immigration laws over a period of years has resulted in countless criminals being released into Chicago who should have been held for immigration removal from the United States. [44]
Sanctuary jurisdictions fought back, and on Feb. 9, San Francisco and Santa Clara counties (California), King County (Washington), Portland (Oregon), and New Haven (Connecticut) sued the Trump administration for the “illegal targeting” of sanctuary cities via violations of the due process clause, the separation of powers, and the 10th Amendment. San Francisco City Attorney David Chiu stated, “This is the federal government illegally asserting a right it does not have, telling cities how to use their resources, and commandeering local law enforcement.” On April 24, 2025, U.S. District Judge William Orrick issued an injunction that blocked the Trump administration from withholding funds to 16 sanctuary cities. [45] [46]
On April 28, 2025, Trump issued another executive order—“Protecting American Communities from Criminal Aliens”—stating that Article II of the U.S. Constitution requires that the federal government “protect each of [the States] against Invasion.” The order directs the Attorney General and the Secretary of Homeland Security to publish a list of “sanctuary jurisdictions.” Those jurisdictions are then subject to loss of federal funds and legal action. The order was almost immediately challenged in court. [46] [59]
Still, the Department of Homeland Security published a “comprehensive” list of “sanctuary cities” on May 29, 2025. On May 31, the National Sheriffs’ Association issued a statement that read:
This list was created without any input, criteria of compliance, or a mechanism for how to object to the designation. Sheriffs nationwide have no way to know what they must do or not do to avoid this arbitrary label … . In a meeting today called by the National Sheriffs’ Association (NSA), with members of DHS, no political appointee for the administration could explain who compiled, proofed, and verified the list before publication. The NSA believes that the criteria for evaluation used by DHS must be published immediately, and they must provide a legitimate reason to evaluate those not cooperating with ICE and other federal law enforcement agencies. These are not just common-sense efforts; they are urgent necessities. DHS and the Administration should publicly denounce the report to demonstrate accountability. The Sheriffs of this country feel betrayed. The current list must be removed immediately, and DHS must release an apology to the Sheriffs and the American people. [60] [62]
On June 1, the Department of Homeland Security removed the list from the department’s website. [61]
So, are sanctuary cities good for the United States?
Pro 1: Sanctuary cities can encourage better relationships between undocumented immigrants and law enforcement.
Undocumented immigrant cooperation with the police is statistically proven to make sanctuary cities safer. A study that analyzed “more than 35,000 incidents of violent crime and 130,000 incidents of property crime across 40 MSAs [metropolitan cities] and over 25 years [found] that Latinos have a higher probability (by 12 percentage points) of reporting violent crime victimization to law enforcement after a sanctuary policy is adopted” in their city. [15] [40]
Murder rates in one of the oldest sanctuary cities, San Francisco, have dropped steadily since the 1989 “City of Refuge” ordinance was enacted. In 2024, the city reported the lowest murder rate since 1960 (with 35 murders). In fact, San Francisco’s murder rate is considerably lower than comparable non-sanctuary cities: 183 murders in Dallas and 173 in Indianapolis in 2024. [36] [37] [38]
Furthermore, 70 percent of undocumented immigrants are less likely to report being the victim of a crime, and 45 percent of Latinos are less likely to report crimes or voluntarily offer information about a crime for fear that police officers will ask about their immigration status. The fear of being asked about their immigration status also makes people less likely to cooperate with investigations. Sanctuary city policies and the corresponding actions from law enforcement make undocumented immigrants more likely to report crimes and cooperate with police. [15] [16] [19]
This cooperation is ruined, however, with random round-ups and arrests of undocumented immigrants. “The chaos that unfolded in Los Angeles [in June 2025],” reported journalist Julianne McShane, “was sparked by US Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) raids at workplaces, a controversial policy that seems designed to appease the Trump administration’s desire to increase the number of deportations at all costs.” [57]
Pro 2: Sanctuary cities are upholding the Constitution’s Tenth Amendment.
The Tenth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution provides for the separation of federal and state powers.
According to the Immigrant Legal Resource Center, the amendment prevents the “federal government from coercing state or local governments to use their resources to enforce a federal regulatory program, like immigration,” and, thus, Congress cannot compel state or local governments to collect immigration status information in order to share it with the federal government. [4] [7]
Because the data are never collected because of “don’t ask, don’t tell” policies, the local and state governments are not in violation of federal law. [4]
Pro 3: Sanctuary cities protect undocumented immigrants from unjust federal immigration laws.
Many people believe that the federal immigration deportation policies are unjust, because they target undocumented immigrants indiscriminately, deport people who have lived in the United States since childhood, deport people who have committed no crimes, separate families, and cause people to live in constant fear of deportation and its devastating consequences. [11]
Libby Schaaf, former mayor of Oakland, California, said, “I like to compare this to conscientious objector status. We are not going to use our resources to enforce what we believe are unjust immigration laws.” [11]
Con 1: Sanctuary cities harbor criminals, creating a dangerous environment for U.S. citizens.
After entering the country illegally in 2022, José Antonio Ibarra, a Venezuelan criminal with ties to the Tren de Aragua gang, was arrested in New York, a sanctuary city, but released before federal authorities could detain him. He then traveled to Athens, Georgia, where on Feb, 22, 2024, he kidnapped, assaulted, and murdered 22-year-old nursing student Laken Riley. [42] [43]
Deputy Director of ICE Patrick J. Lechleitner reported, “As of July 21, 2024, there were 662,566 noncitizens with criminal histories on ICE’s national docket, which includes those detained by ICE, and on the agency’s non-detained docket. Of those, 435,719 are convicted criminals, and 226,847 have pending criminal charges.” Lechleitner also noted that 425,431 of the convicted criminals and 222,141 of those with pending criminal charges were not detained by ICE, leaving 647,572 undocumented criminals and alleged criminals without federal supervision, the majority of whom were convicted or charged with “dangerous drugs” crimes. [39]
Con 2: Sanctuary cities defy federal laws to which state and local governments are bound.
U.S. Code, Title 8, § 1373 , states that “a Federal, State, or local government entity or official may not prohibit, or in any way restrict, any government entity or official from sending to, or receiving from, the Immigration and Naturalization Service information regarding the citizenship or immigration status, lawful or unlawful, of any individual.” [5]
The U.S. Department of Justice requires that most recipients of federal grant money certify their compliance with all federal laws. Sanctuary cities, by not asking about, recording, and submitting to the federal government the immigration status of residents, are violating federal law and the rules for getting federal grant money. [4] [6]
Con 3: Sanctuary cities prevent local and state police officers from doing their jobs, spurring violence.
Sanctuary policies prevent the police from investigating, questioning, and arresting people who have broken federal immigration law. Many crimes, violent and otherwise, could be prevented if local law enforcement in sanctuary cities could arrest undocumented immigrants for their first crime on U.S. soil—illegal entry into the country—and turn them over to federal law enforcement. [14]
According to Heather Mac Donald of the Manhattan Institute, many Salvadorian gang members living in Los Angeles entered the United States illegally, but, because of sanctuary policies, LA police officers cannot arrest the undocumented immigrants for illegal entry. Instead, law enforcement has to wait for a second crime to be committed to get the criminals off the street. This not only inefficient, but dangerous. [14]
Over a decade later, Mac Donald noted that “after a day and a half of rioting in Los Angeles County [in June 2025], President Donald Trump activated the National Guard to protect federal officers and property.” She asserted that “L.A.’s illegal-alien riots have provided Trump with a picture-perfect opportunity to deliver on his central campaign promises: the era of tolerating arson, looting, destruction of property, and attacks on law enforcement is over; the era of enabling endemic immigration lawlessness is over.” [58]