Table of Contents Ask the Chatbot
Traditionally favored by private and parochial (church) institutions , school uniforms are being adopted by U.S. public schools in increasing numbers. The percentage of public schools that required school uniforms jumped from 11.8 percent in the 1999–2000 school year to 21.5 percent in the 2015–16 school year. Since that peak, there has been a slight decline each school year: 19.8 percent during the 2017-18 school year, 18.8 percent during the 2019-2020 school year, and (the most recent data available) 16.4 percent in the 2021-2022 school year. Schools where students of color represented less than 25 percent of the student population were less likely to require uniforms, whereas schools with a higher proportion of students of color were more likely to enact and enforce dress codes. [100] [101]
What do you think?
Explore the ProCon debate
However, while school uniform requirements have tended to be relaxed as students get older, strict dress codes have frequently been instituted instead, especially in middle and high school. According to data reviewed in 2023, 43 percent of primary schools, 62 percent of middle schools, and 56 percent of high schools had “strict dress codes.” [97]
History of School Uniforms
The first recorded use of standardized dress in education may have been in England in 1222, when the Archbishop of Canterbury mandated that students wear a robe-like outfit called the “ cappa clausa .” The origin of the modern school uniform can be traced to 16th-century England, when the impoverished “charity children” attending the Christ’s Hospital boarding school wore blue cloaks reminiscent of the cassocks worn by clergy, along with yellow stockings. As of Sept. 2014, students at Christ’s Hospital were still wearing the same uniform, and according to the school it is the oldest school uniform still in use. When Christ’s Hospital surveyed its students in 2011, 95 percent voted to keep the traditional uniforms. [14] [83]
In later centuries, school uniforms became associated with the upper class. At one of England’s most prestigious schools, Eton , students were required to wear black top hats and tails on and off campus until 1972, when the dress codes began to be relaxed. [14]
School uniforms in the United States followed the traditional use of uniforms established in England and were generally limited to private and parochial schools. One exception was found in government-run boarding schools for Native American children, first established in the late 1800s, where the children, who had been removed from their families, were dressed in military-style uniforms. [14] [49]
U.S. School Uniform Movement Begins
The first U.S. public schools known to institute uniform policies were in Maryland and Washington, D.C ., in the fall of 1987, with Cherry Hill Elementary School in Baltimore , Maryland, gaining the most publicity. These early uniform programs were voluntary, but according to a New York Times report from Dec. 1987, most parents supported the idea and “almost all” students wore the uniforms. School officials and other advocates of the new uniform policies noted improvements in students’ “frame of mind” and stated that uniforms had “sharply reduced discipline problems.” They also reported that uniforms had “already reduced the preoccupation of students with expensive designer clothing for school wear and eased the financial burden that placed on the students’ families.” The origin of the uniform policy in Baltimore has been linked to a 1986 shooting, in which a local public school student was wounded during a fight over a pair of $95 sunglasses. [14] [48]
By the fall of 1988, 39 public elementary schools and two public junior high schools in Washington, D.C., had instituted mandatory uniform polices, and soon the movement spread to other states, including Connecticut and New Jersey, generally in urban schools with mainly low income and minority students. In 1988, Ed Koch , then-Mayor of New York City, expressed support for school uniforms, saying that they encourage “common respect and improve the learning environment,” and praising them because of their similarity to outfits worn in private and parochial schools. A pilot uniform program was introduced in New York City in 1989. [14]
The first school district in the United States to require all its K-8 students to wear uniforms was the Long Beach Unified School District, California, in Jan. 1994. Later the same year, California Governor Pete Wilson signed a bill officially allowing schools to implement mandatory uniform policies. In accordance with the new law, Long Beach parents were given an opt-out provision. The Long Beach Unified School District announced through a spokesman that gang activity in the area had provided an impetus for the policy: “Every large city in the U.S. has been concerned about the gangs. Their clothes really are an unofficial uniform of intimidation.” [50] [52]
Bill Clinton’s Support of Uniforms
On Jan. 23, 1996, President Bill Clinton told Congress during his State of the Union speech: “[I]f it means that teenagers will stop killing each other over designer jackets, then our public schools should be able to require their students to wear school uniforms.” [51]
On Feb. 25, 1996, President Clinton repeated his message about uniforms in his weekly radio address and during a series of media appearances. On the same day, he ordered the distribution of a school uniform manual to the country’s 16,000 school districts. The manual guided school districts in the legal enforcement of a uniform policy. In July 1998, President Clinton continued his promotion of school uniforms with a speech at the annual convention of the American Federation of Teachers , stating that uniforms help children “feel free” and reduce crime and violence. In response, according to the New York Times , U.S. Senator and former U.S. presidential candidate Phil Gramm “accused the President of a tendency toward intrusive government.” [52]
School Uniforms and the Law
In 1969 the U.S. Supreme Court made a decision that would later be used by both uniform proponents and opponents to support their arguments. In Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District , the Court ruled 7-2 that schools could not curtail students’ freedom of expression as long as the students’ choices were “not disruptive, and did not impinge upon the rights of others.” The students in question had worn black armbands to protest America’s involvement in the Vietnam War , and school uniform opponents use this decision to argue that students’ choice of what to wear is protected by the Free Speech Clause in the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution . Uniform proponents, however, cite a passage in Tinker‘s majority opinion that states, “The problem posed by the present case does not relate to regulation of the length of skirts or the type of clothing.” [18] [28]
Several lower courts have made rulings related to school uniforms, often favoring uniform proponents. In a 1995 case, Bivens by Green v. Albuquerque Public Schools , a federal district judge ruled that the desire to wear “sagging pants,” which had been prohibited by the schools’ dress code, did not constitute freedom of expression because, unlike the wearing of black armbands to protest the Vietnam War , it did not convey a “message,” nor did it represent an ethnic identity: “Sagging is not necessarily associated with a single racial or cultural group, and sagging is seen by some merely as a fashion trend followed by many adolescents all over the United States.” The plaintiff had contended that his choice of outfit was an element of hip hop style favored by minorities and that it constituted a “group identity,” stating that “such intentional identification clearly must involve freedom of expression.” The court disagreed, and schools could continue to ban sagging pants. [18] [58]
In Mar. 1997 an Arizona state appeals court upheld Phoenix Preparatory Academy’s mandatory uniform policy, declaring it to be constitutional. This was the first time a judge had upheld a uniform policy that did not provide an “opt-out” provision. One of the students who brought suit against the school district had broken the school’s uniform restrictions by wearing a t-shirt adorned with the U.S. flag and the slogan “I support my country.” The other student filing suit had worn a t-shirt portraying Jesus Christ and the Bible, along with the words “True Spirit” and “The School of Higher Learning.” The unanimous ruling (3-0) in Phoenix Elementary School District No. 1 v. Green found that by enforcing a uniform policy, the school “regulated the medium of expression, not the message” and found that school was “not a public forum” in which freedom of expression would be more strictly protected. The court accepted the school district’s claim that it adopted the uniform policy to serve several pedagogically “reasonable” purposes, including the promotion of “a more effective climate for learning,” “campus safety and security,” “school unity and pride,” and “modest dress.” [53]
In the summer of 1999, controversy erupted in Florida when Polk County Schools Superintendent Glenn Reynolds suggested that parents could be jailed if they failed to comply with the new mandatory uniform policy. Reynolds stated that parents who allow their children to be dressed out of uniform are “contributing to the delinquency of a child,” before later retracting his comments. [82]
In Jan. 2000 the American Civil Liberties Union of North Carolina, which opposes school uniforms, represented a nine-year-old student who was suspended twice for his refusal to wear a school uniform because it conflicted with his family’s religious beliefs. According to court records in Hicks v. Halifax County Board of Education , the student’s great-grandmother and guardian believed that “wearing a uniform demonstrates an allegiance to the spirit of the anti-Christ, a being that requires uniformity, sameness, enforced conformity, and the absence of diversity.” The school agreed to amend its school uniform policy to allow for religious exemptions. [54] [55] [59]
In May 2008, a three-judge panel of the U.S. Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals ruled 2-1 in Jacobs v. Clark County School District that the mandatory school uniform policy introduced by the Nevada district is constitutional. An 11th grade student and her parents had sued the district for refusing to allow her to wear a shirt displaying a message presenting her religious beliefs. The court ruled that the district’s uniform policy was not restricting any one viewpoint in particular, and that therefore the policy was “content neutral” and not an infringement of “pure speech.” [77]
In Feb. 2014, a three-judge panel of the U.S. Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals found 3-0 that the uniform policy of Roy Gomm Elementary School in Reno , Nevada, may be unconstitutional, but sent the case back to a lower court for review. The panel ruled that the school’s insistence that its uniform shirts bear the motto “Tomorrow’s Leaders” may violate First Amendment rights because it “compelled speech.” No U.S. states require school uniforms, and no states ban uniforms. Massachusetts law states that “school officials shall not abridge the rights of students as to personal dress and appearance,” but another section of the law stipulates that this provision applies only to cities and towns which “accept” it. [56] [57] [81]
Students at Charter Day School in Leland, North Carolina successfully challenged a uniform policy that prohibited girls from wearing pants or shorts to school. Judge Malcolm J. Howard of the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of North Carolina ruled in March 2019 that the school’s stated desire to uphold traditional values and instill discipline had no connection to requiring girls to wear skirts, jumpers or “skorts.” That decision was reversed in 2021 by a panel of three judges in the U.S. Court of Appeals. The new ruling, however, was itself reversed on June 14, 2022, when the full U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit in Richmond , Virginia, voted 10-6 that Charter Day School had indeed violated female students’ rights by requiring them to wear skirts. The ruling stated the school “has imposed the skirts requirement with the express purpose of telegraphing to children that girls are ‘fragile,’ require protection by boys and warrant different treatment than male students, stereotypes with potentially devastating consequences for young girls.” Female students, as a result, did not have to wear skirts. [96] [98]
So, should students wear school uniforms? Explore the debate below.
Pros and Cons at a Glance
PROS
CONS
Pro 1: School uniforms deter crime and increase student safety. Read More.
Con 1: School uniforms do not stop bullying and can actually increase violent attacks. Read More.
Pro 2: School uniforms foster a sense of belonging and unity, keeping students focused on education, not their clothes. Read More.
Con 2: School uniforms do not improve attendance, academic preparedness, or exam results. Read More.
Pro 3: Students’ legal right to free expression remains intact with mandatory school uniforms. Read More.
Con 3: School uniforms restrict students’ freedom of expression. Read More.
Pro 1: School uniforms deter crime and increase student safety.
In Long Beach, California, after two years of a district-wide K-8 mandatory uniform policy, reports of assault and battery in the district’s schools decreased by 34 percent, assault with a deadly weapon dropped by 50 percent, fighting incidents went down by 51 percent, sex offenses were cut by 74 percent, robbery dropped by 65 percent, possession of weapons (or weapon “look-alikes”) decreased by 52 percent, possession of drugs went down by 69 percent, and vandalism was lowered by 18 percent. [64]
One year after Sparks Middle School in Nevada instituted a uniform policy, school police data showed a 63 percent drop in police log reports, and decreases were also noted in gang activity, student fights, graffiti, property damage, and battery. A peer-reviewed study found that schools with uniform policies had 12 percent fewer firearm-related incidents and 15 percent fewer drug-related incidents than schools without uniforms. [25] [69]
School uniforms also prevent students from concealing weapons under baggy clothing, make it easier to keep track of students on field trips, and make intruders on campus more visible. Frank Quatrone, superintendent in the Lodi school district of New Jersey, states, “When you have students dressed alike, you make them safer. If someone were to come into a building, the intruder could easily be recognized.” [6] [38]
Further, school uniforms create a level playing field among students, reducing peer pressure and bullying. When all students are dressed alike, competition between students over clothing choices and the teasing of those who are dressed in less expensive or less fashionable outfits can be eliminated. Research by the Schoolwear Association found that 83 percent of teachers thought “a good school uniform…could prevent bullying based on appearance or economic background.” Arminta Jacobson, founder and director of the Center for Parent Education at the University of North Texas, states that uniforms put “all kids on the same playing field in terms of their appearance. I think it probably gives them a sense of belonging and a feeling of being socially accepted.” [5] [91]
And, school uniforms prevent the display of gang colors and insignia, reducing gang activity and pressure to join on school property. The U.S. Department of Education’s Manual on School Uniforms stated that uniform policies can “prevent gang members from wearing gang colors and insignia at school” in order to “encourage a safe environment.” Educators in the Long Beach Unified School District have speculated that the sharp reduction in crime following the introduction of school uniforms was a result of gang conflicts being curbed. Osceola County, Florida School Board member Jay Wheeler reports that the county’s schools had a 46 percent drop in gang activity after their first full school year with a mandatory K-12 uniform policy. Wheeler explains that “clothing is integral to gang culture…Imagine a U.S. Armed Forces recruiter out of uniform trying to recruit new soldiers; the success rate goes down. The same applies to gang recruitment.” [35] [37] [67] [35] [37] [67]
Pro 2: School uniforms foster a sense of belonging and unity, keeping students focused on education, not their clothes.
The National Association of Secondary School Principals states, “When all students are wearing the same outfit, they are less concerned about how they look and how they fit in with their peers; thus, they can concentrate on their schoolwork.” And a study by the University of Houston found that elementary school girls’ language test scores increased by about three percentile points after uniforms were introduced. [1] [15]
Former U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton advocates school uniforms as a way to help students focus on learning: “Take that [clothing choices] off the table and put the focus on school, not on what you’re wearing.” Chris Hammons, principal of Woodland Middle School in Coeur d’Alene, Idaho, explains that uniforms “provide for less distraction, less drama, and more of a focus on learning.” [30] [70]
Wearing uniforms also enhances school pride, unity, and community spirit, which can boost interest in education. A study of over 1,000 Texas middle school students found that students in uniform “reported significantly more positive perceptions of belonging in their school community than reported by students in the standard dress group.” Christopher P. Clouet, former superintendent of the New London Public Schools in Connecticut, stated that “the wearing of uniforms contributes to school pride.” Arnold Goldstein, PhD, head of the Center for Research on Aggression at Syracuse University, points out that uniforms help troubled students feel they have the support of a community: “There is a sense of belonging.” Further, “teachers perceived an increase in the level of respect, caring, and trust…throughout the school” and “students are made to feel ‘important’ and as if they are a part of a team by wearing a uniform,” according to a peer-reviewed study. [3] [20] [31] [33]
Plus, school uniforms can improve attendance and discipline. A study by researchers at the University of Houston found that the average absence rate for girls in middle and high school decreased by 7 percent after the introduction of uniforms, and behavioral problems lessened in severity. School uniforms make getting ready for school easier, which can improve punctuality.
When uniforms are mandatory, parents and students do not spend time choosing appropriate outfits for the school day. According to a national survey, over 90 percent of U.S. school leaders believe school uniform or formal dress code policies “eliminate wardrobe battles with kids,” make it “easier to get kids ready in the morning,” and create “time saving in the morning.” Tracey Marinelli, superintendent of the Lyndhurst School District in New Jersey, credits the district’s uniform policy for reducing the number of students running late. Lyndhurst student Mike Morreale agrees, stating that “it’s so much easier to dress than having to search for clothes and find out that something doesn’t match.” A Youngstown State University study of secondary schools in Ohio’s eight largest school districts found that school uniform policies improve rates of attendance, graduation, and suspension. [1] [6] [7] [27] [32]
During the first semester of a mandatory uniform program at John Adams Middle School in Albuquerque, New Mexico, discipline referrals dropped from 1,565 during the first semester of the year prior to 405, a 74 percent decrease. Macquarie University (Australia) researchers found that in schools across the world where uniform policies are enforced, students “are more disciplined” and “listen significantly better, there are lower noise levels, and lower teaching waiting times with classes starting on time.” [68] [89]
Wasted time in classrooms is reduced because uniform policies save valuable class time because they are easier to enforce than a standard dress code. Doris Jo Murphy, former director of field experiences at the University of North Texas College of Education, states, “As an elementary assistant principal in two suburban districts, I can tell you that the dress code took up a great deal of my time in the area of discipline…I wished many times that we had uniforms because the issue of skirts or shorts being too short, and baggy jeans and pants on the boys not being pulled up as they needed to be, would have been a non-issue.” Lyndhurst school district superintendent Tracey Marinelli had a similar experience before a uniform policy was introduced: “Kids were spending time in the office because they were not fulfilling the dress code…That was time away from class.” [5] [6]
Adds Miranda Orkulas at the Royal Public Schools of San Antonio, Texas, “Uniforms create a level playing field by making students look and feel equal.” This can be especially “beneficial in schools with a diverse student body, where the uniform becomes a unifying symbol, emphasizing that everyone is part of the same community.” [99]
Pro 3: Students’ legal right to free expression remains intact with mandatory school uniforms.
The 1969 U.S. Supreme Court case Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District , which concerned the wearing of black armbands to protest the Vietnam War, confirmed that students’ constitutional right to free speech “does not relate to regulation of the length of skirts or the type of clothing.” Wearing one’s own choice of shirt or pants is not the “pure speech” protected by the Constitution. [18] [28]
In Canady v. Bossier Parish School Board (3-0, 2001), the U.S. Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals upheld a school board’s right to implement a mandatory uniform policy, stating that requiring uniforms for the purpose of increasing test scores and improving discipline “is in no way related to the suppression of student speech. [Students] remain free to wear what they want after school hours. Students may still express their views through other mediums during the school day.” [18] [29]
Besides, students can still express their individuality in school uniforms by introducing variations and adding accessories. Junior high school student Amelia Jimenez wrote in her op-ed for the Pennsylvania Patriot-News that “contrary to popular belief, uniforms do not stop students from being themselves. Uniforms do not silence voices. Students can wear a variety of expressive items, such as buttons or jewelry.” Students can inject their personal style into their daily look with hairstyles, nail polish, and colorful accessories such as bags, scarfs, and fun socks. 54 percent of eighth-graders said they could still express their individuality while wearing school uniforms. [61] [62] [65]
Further, students dressed in uniform are better perceived by teachers and peers. A 1994 peer-reviewed study found that students in uniform were perceived by teachers and fellow students as being more academically proficient than students in regular clothes. The study also found that students in uniform were perceived by peers and teachers as having higher academic potential, and perceived by peers as being better behaved. Students need to learn a balance between free expression and working within the confines of expectations. [4]