Chuck Baldwin
Chuck Baldwin, Founder and Minister of the Crossroad Baptist Church in Pensacola, FL, in a May 9, 2008 article titled "Strictly Personal" on www.renewamerica.us:
I believe abortion is America’s national holocaust. It is the deliberate killing of innocent human life. Furthermore, it is absolutely disgraceful that while the so-called "pro-life" Republican Party controlled the entire federal government from 2000 to 2006, they did nothing to overturn Roe v. Wade and end legalized abortion.
John McCain
John McCain, US Senator (R-AZ), issued the following statement in an article titled "Human Dignity and the Sanctity of Life: Overturning Roe v. Wade" on his official candidate website (accessed Aug. 20, 2008):
John McCain believes Roe v. Wade is a flawed decision that must be overturned, and as president he will nominate judges who understand that courts should not be in the business of legislating from the bench.
Constitutional balance would be restored by the reversal of Roe v. Wade, returning the abortion question to the individual states. The difficult issue of abortion should not be decided by judicial fiat.
However, the reversal of Roe v. Wade represents only one step in the long path toward ending abortion. Once the question is returned to the states, the fight for life will be one of courage and compassion - the courage of a pregnant mother to bring her child into the world and the compassion of civil society to meet her needs and those of her newborn baby. The pro-life movement has done tremendous work in building and reinforcing the infrastructure of civil society by strengthening faith-based, community, and neighborhood organizations that provide critical services to pregnant mothers in need. This work must continue and government must find new ways to empower and strengthen these armies of compassion. These important groups can help build the consensus necessary to end abortion at the state level. As John McCain has publicly noted, ’At its core, abortion is a human tragedy. To effect meaningful change, we must engage the debate at a human level.’
Editor’s Note: In addition to John McCain’s undated Not Clearly Pro or Con position above, regarding keeping abortion legal, he has also expressed a Pro position as indicated in his July 21, 2005 statement on Hardball with Chris Matthews:
John McCain: I think it [right to an abortion] depends on the stage of the pregnancy, and I know we’re splitting hairs here. But there’s a point-there’s a point where the woman’s health is, obviously, in the later stages of pregnancy, is-gains in greater and greater importance. But I believe that if Roe v. Wade itself were repealed, we would go back to the states. And the states would make decisions according to the standards that they want to prevail within their states. So, if Roe v. Wade were repealed, that wouldn’t have the Draconian effects that some view it. And I’m, being a states rights guy, that would be fine with me...
Chris Mathews] It would be OK with you if some states said that a woman couldn’t have an abortion, even if her health was in danger?
John McCain]: My position-my position is life of the mother, obviously... Rape, incest, or the life of the mother.