Since the 1990s elected officials in several U.S. states have made unsuccessful attempts to lower the voting age from 18 to 16 and sometimes even younger. [1]
Student activism in the wake of the February 2018 shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Florida, brought new life to the debate about letting younger people vote in elections. [2]
Internationally, about a dozen countries allow citizens to vote at age 16, sometimes with conditions such as being employed or married, including Argentina , Austria , Brazil , the Channel Islands , Cuba , Ecuador , the Isle of Man , and Malta . The United Kingdom lowered the voting age to 16 in July 2025 for the whole of the country (Scotland and Wales had lowered the age previously for some elections). [48] [59]
To propose an amendment to the U.S. Constitution, for lowering the national voting age to 16, two-thirds of both houses of the U.S. Congress (or two-thirds of U.S. states) would need to approve the proposal; then, three-fourths of the states (meaning 38 of them) would need to ratify it. However, cities can pass laws allowing younger people to vote in local elections. [3] [4]
Until the 1970s the voting age in America was 21. A debate over lowering it to 18 began during World War II when President Franklin D. Roosevelt decreased the military draft age to 18. President Dwight D. Eisenhower called for citizens ages 18 to 21 to be included in the political process in his 1954 State of the Union address . But lawmakers didn’t take action until marches and demonstrations drew attention to the fact that young people who were being drafted to fight in the Vietnam War did not also have the right to vote. Fighting for your country, perhaps dying for your county, while not also having the right to vote in your country, seemed to many a disparity that needed to be remedied. [43] [44]
What do you think?
Explore the ProCon debate
As a result, Congress proposed the 26th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution in 1971, which stated, “The right of citizens of the United States, who are eighteen years of age or older, to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of age.” The ratification process, which required the approval of 38 states, was completed in about three months, the shortest amount of time of any amendment in U.S. history. [45] [46]
While the push to lower the voting age even further is an uphill battle, some smaller jurisdictions have done so. A dozen or so cities in California , Maryland , New Jersey, and Vermont allow 16- and 17-year-olds to vote in local elections, including school board elections. [52] [53] [54]
So, should the U.S. voting age be lowered to 16?
Pro 1: 16-year-olds are just as knowledgeable about civics and have the same ability to make good voting choices as older voters.
A study in the Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science in 2011 found “on measures of civic knowledge, political skills, political efficacy, and tolerance, 16-year-olds, on average, are obtaining scores similar to those of adults…. Adolescents in this age range are developmentally ready to vote.” [7]
Some scientists believe that “cold cognition” skills, those used to make the kind of informed, well-thought-out choices needed in voting, are solidly established in 16-year-olds. [8]
Austria lowered the voting age to 16 in 2007. According to Markus Wagner, social sciences professor at the University of Vienna, and his coauthors, studies of elections after the Austrian voting age was lowered show “the quality of these [younger] citizens’ choices is similar to that of older voters, so they do cast votes in ways that enable their interests to be represented equally well.” [9]
Pro 2: Lowering the voting age to 16 would increase voter turnout and encourage a lifelong habit of voting.
The United States has one of the lowest voter turnout rates among developed countries, but a person who votes in one election has a 13 percent greater probability of voting in a future election. Researchers say that people who participate in elections when they first reach voting age are more likely to develop the habit of voting, and those who don’t are more likely to remain nonvoters. So why not begin voting at an earlier age? [18] [19] [20] [21]
Sixteen-year-olds are learning about government and civics in high school, and this structured environment for learning would lead to higher turnout among 16- and 17-year-olds as teachers and parents help them overcome the typical obstacles that first-time voters face, such as the registration process and finding their polling places. By contrast, many 18-year-olds are busier, in a time of transition, making them less likely to participate in elections. [9] [22] [23]
Involving young people in voting can also have a “trickle up” effect that mobilizes their parents and other adults in their households to vote, increasing the overall voter turnout rate. Turnout among 16- and 17-year-olds in Takoma Park, Maryland, the first U.S. municipality to lower the voting age for local elections, was double that of eligible voters 18 and older. [24] [25] [26]
Pro 3: 16-year-olds should have a voice in the laws that affect their lives and future.
A U.S. Senate report cited student activism and protests as reasons for lowering the voting age to 18 in the 1970s during the Vietnam War: “We must channel these energies into our political system and give young people the real opportunity to influence our society in a peaceful and constructive manner.” [33]
Students today live under threats to their futures, such as school shootings and climate change, and they deserve to have influence over their elected officials beyond the protests they’ve organized. [34]
Sofie Whitney, a survivor of the school shooting in Parkland, Florida, says, “If 16-year-old students are old enough to be affected by the laws, and realize that there is a problem, then they should have the power to help change it.” Adds 16-year-old Elijah Robinson, in a statement highlighted on the website of Vote16USA, a major advocate for allowing younger people to vote, “16-year-olds deal with peer pressure, gun violence, drugs, bullying and more. We’re mature enough to rise above all of that, and we do have a voice.” [35] [55]
Moreover, the age of 16 is when people’s relationship with the law changes as they often start driving, working, and paying taxes. Furthermore, in most states, 16-year-olds can be emancipated from their parents and live independently. [36] [37] [38] [49]
Con 1: 16-year-olds are not mature enough to participate responsibly in elections.
Not only do 16-year-olds lack enough life experience to vote responsibly, recent scholarship shows they are also not neurologically and physiologically mature enough for responsible citizenship. As researchers Tak Wing Chan and Matthew Clayton point out, “neuroscience suggests that the brain, specifically the prefrontal cortex, is still undergoing major reconstruction and development during the teenage years.” The prefrontal cortex is what “enables us to weigh dilemmas, balance trade-offs and, in short, make reasonable decisions in politics.” [10] [11] [12]
Moreover, society for good reason subjects people under 18 to different labor, contract, and criminal responsibility laws. They aren’t even allowed to join the military without parental consent, serve on a jury, get guns, or even smoke cigarettes. Most 16- and 17-year-olds, in fact, are still living at home and therefore, in many cases, would simply mimic the voting behavior of their parents. [13] [14] [15] [16] [17]
Why would we want such kids, so lacking in maturity and independent life experience, making decisions that affect all of society? Experiencing horrible events such as gun violence and bullying at school are not substitutes for the maturity needed for wise citizenship.
Con 2: Not only do 16-year-olds lack life experience, but they have even performed horribly in civics education.
Even in the few civics classes they do experience, students have routinely performed poorly in them, giving us little confidence in their ability to engage in prudent citizenship. Only 20 percent of eighth-graders scored at or above the “proficient” level on the last National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) test of civics knowledge and skills in 2022. This marks a decline from 21 percent in the previous two iterations of the text in 2018 and 1998. Furthermore, 31 percent are below the NAEP “basic” level, which means a large number of eighth-graders could not “define government, constitution, the rule of law, and politics," which are basic tenets of civic knowledge needed to vote. [56]
Moreover, eighth-grade scores on the NAEP U.S. History test dropped to their lowest point ever in 2022. Only 13 percent of students scored at or above the “proficient” level, and 40 percent scored below the “basic” level, which means a large number of eighth graders could not choose the correct multiple choice answer for why people supported the Eighteenth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. Of course, many adults today may also be unable to pass a civics exam, but life experience can also spur good citizenship and good voting habits and make up for a lack of “book knowledge.” However, 16-year-olds lack this life experience as well. [57]
While eighth-grade test results from 2022 may seem outdated, those 13- and 14-year-olds are now 16 and older. Given that the last round of 12th-grade test results were hardly stellar, it’s fair to assume those kids in eighth grade in 2022 don’t have much more knowledge about civics and U.S. history now. [58]
“My concern is if 16-year-olds were allowed to vote on any kind of broad scale, what we’d actually be doing is bringing the least politically informed, the least politically experienced, the least mature in terms of making long-term judgments and trade-offs, directly into and potentially affecting our voter turnout and results,” says David Davenport, research fellow at the Hoover Institution. [32]
Con 3: The majority of Americans of all ages and political views agree that 16-year-olds should not be allowed to vote.
A Hill-HarrisX poll found that 84 percent of registered voters opposed lowering the voting age to 16. The poll found that every age group was against allowing 16-year-olds to vote. Those most in favor of this idea were adults under age 35, but they still accounted for only 39 percent of those polled. [47]
A different survey found only 8 percent support for lowering the voting age to 16; 45 percent want to keep it at 18; and 46 percent would like to raise it back to age 21. [40]
A Twitter poll by WJLA, the ABC news affiliate in Washington, D.C., found just 18 percent support for a proposed bill to lower the voting age to 16 in the District of Columbia, compared to 77 percent against. The local NBC news affiliate ran a similar poll online in which 83 percent of participants were against the bill. [41] [42]