The Electoral College has been a continuous source of controversy since its creation by the Founding Fathers . Is it a fair way of electing the president of the United States, or should it be scrapped? The debate over its continued use resurfaced during the 2016 presidential election , when Donald Trump lost the popular vote to Hillary Clinton by more than 2.8 million votes but won 30 states and the Electoral College and therefore the presidency. The official election results show that Trump received 304 Electoral College votes and 46.09 percent of the popular vote (62,984,825 votes), whereas Hillary Clinton received only 227 Electoral College votes but 48.18 percent of the popular vote (65,853,516 votes). [1]
This occurrence—whereby a candidate wins the Electoral College and therefore the presidency while losing the popular vote—has happened four other times in American history: in 1824 ( John Quincy Adams over Andrew Jackson ), 1876 ( Rutherford B. Hayes over Samuel Tilden ), 1888 ( Benjamin Harrison over Grover Cleveland ), and 2000 ( George W. Bush over Al Gore ). [2]
Electoral College Learn how the Electoral College elects the U.S. president. (more)
The Electoral College was established in 1788 by Article II of the U.S. Constitution , which also established the executive branch of the U.S. government, and was revised by the Twelfth Amendment (ratified June 15, 1804), the Fourteenth Amendment (ratified July 1868), and the Twenty-third Amendment (ratified March 29, 1961). Because the Electoral College is part of the U.S. Constitution, only a constitutional amendment could abolish it: two-thirds of the U.S. Congress or states would have to propose the amendment, and then three-fourths of the states (38 of the 50) would have to ratify it. [3] [4] [5] [6]
The Founding Fathers likely created the Electoral College for a variety of reasons. As Encyclopaedia Britannica explains, “Historians have suggested a variety of reasons for the adoption of the Electoral College, including concerns about the separation of powers and the relationship between the executive and legislative branches, the balance between small and large states, slavery, and the perceived dangers of direct [popular vote] democracy. One supporter of the Electoral College, Alexander Hamilton, argued that while it [this process for electing the president] might not be perfect, it was ‘at least excellent.’” The Electoral College consists of 538 electors: each state is allowed 1 elector for each of its members in the U.S. Congress (which amounts to 535 electors), and Washington, D.C. is allowed 3 electors as established by the Twenty-third Amendment , thereby totaling the 538 electors and votes in the Electoral College. [3] [4] [5] [6] [40]
On election day, voters choosing a presidential candidate are actually casting a vote for an elector. Most states use the “winner-take-all” method, in which all electoral votes are awarded to the winner of the popular vote in that state. In Nebraska and Maine , the candidate who wins the state’s overall popular vote receives two electors, and one elector from each congressional district is apportioned to the popular vote winner in that district. To win the presidency, a candidate must win a majority of the electoral votes (meaning, at a minimum, 270 votes, which is one vote more than half of the 538 total votes in the Electoral College, thus constituting a majority). [3] [4] [5] [6]
In each state a group of electors is chosen by each political party. The electors meet on the first Tuesday after the second Wednesday in December after the presidential election. The electors gather in their respective states and cast their votes for president and vice president on separate ballots. Each state then records these votes on a Certificate of Vote. [6]
A September 2020 Gallup poll found that 61 percent of Americans were in favor of abolishing the Electoral College, up 12 points from 2016. By September 2024, however, support for amending the U.S. Constitution to have the popular vote determine the election of a president had dropped to 58 percent. [24] [38]
The United States is the only democratic country in the world in which a presidential candidate can win the most popular votes and lose the election. At least 700 amendments have been proposed to modify or abolish the Electoral College, but none has succeeded. [25] [39]
So, should the United States continue to use the Electoral College in presidential elections? Explore the debate below.
Pro 1: The Electoral College ensures that all parts of the country are involved in selecting U.S. presidents.
If the election depended solely on the popular vote, then presidential candidates could limit campaigning to heavily populated areas or specific regions. Currently, to win the election, candidates need electoral votes from multiple regions and, therefore, they build campaign platforms with a national focus, meaning that the winner will actually be expected to serve the needs of the entire country.
Without the Electoral College, groups such as Iowa farmers and Ohio factory workers would be ignored in favor of pandering to metropolitan areas with higher population densities, leaving rural areas and small towns marginalized. [11] [12] [13]
“The current Electoral College system creates a needed balance between rural and urban interests and ensures that the winning candidate has support from multiple regions of the country,” according to Tina Mulally, a South Dakota state representative. She argues that the Electoral College protects small state and minority interests and that a national popular vote would be “like two wolves and a sheep deciding what’s for dinner.” [32]
Pro 2: The Electoral College was created to protect minority voices from being overwhelmed by the majority.
The Electoral College was created to protect the voices of the minority from being overwhelmed by the will of the majority. The Founding Fathers wanted to balance the will of the populace against the risk of “tyranny of the majority,” in which the voices of the masses can drown out minority interests. [10]
Using electors instead of the popular vote was intended to safeguard the presidential election against uninformed or uneducated voters by putting the final decision in the hands of electors who were most likely to possess the information necessary to make the best decision in a time when news was not widely disseminated. [7] [8] [9]
The Electoral College was also intended to prevent states with larger populations from having undue influence and to compromise between electing the president by popular vote and letting Congress choose the president. [7] [8] [9]
Alexander Hamilton said of the Electoral College that, if it is “not perfect, it is at least excellent,” because it ensured “that the office of President will never fall to the lot of any man who is not in an eminent degree endowed with the requisite qualifications.” [7]
Democratic Nevada Governor Steve Sisolak vetoed a measure in 2019 that would have added the state to the National Popular Vote Interstate Compact, which would have obligated the state’s electors to vote for the popular vote winner. Sisolak stated that the compact “could diminish the role of smaller states like Nevada in national electoral contests and force Nevada’s electors to side with whoever wins the nationwide popular vote, rather than the candidate Nevadans choose.” [31]
“The Framers’ fears of a ‘tyranny of the majority’ is still very relevant today. One can see its importance in the fact that despite Hillary Clinton’s national popular vote total, she won only about a sixth of the counties nationwide, with her support limited mostly to urban areas on both coasts,” explains Hans von Spakovsky, a senior legal fellow at the Heritage Foundation and a former commissioner for the Federal Election Commission (FEC). [34]
Pro 3: The Electoral College can preclude calls for recounts or demands for runoff elections, giving certainty to presidential elections.
If the presidential election were based on the popular vote, it would be possible for a candidate to receive the highest number of popular votes without actually obtaining a majority. [11]
This happened with Richard Nixon in 1968 and Bill Clinton in 1992, when both men won the most electoral votes while receiving just 43 percent of the popular vote. The existence of the Electoral College precluded calls for recounts or demands for runoff elections. [11]
“There is pressure for runoff elections when no candidate wins a majority of the votes cast; that pressure, which would greatly complicate the presidential election process, is reduced by the Electoral College, which invariably produces a clear winner,” explains Richard A. Posner, a former judge on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit and a senior lecturer at the University of Chicago Law School. [11]
The electoral process can also create a larger mandate to increase the president’s credibility; for example, President. Barack Obama received 51.3 percent of the popular vote in 2012 but 61.7 percent of the electoral votes. [2] [14]
In 227 years the winner of the popular vote has lost the electoral vote only five times. This proves the system is working. [2] [14]
Con 1: The Electoral College gives too much power to swing states and allows presidential elections to be decided by a handful of states.
The two main political parties can count on winning the electoral votes in certain states, such as California for the Democratic Party and Indiana for the Republican Party, without worrying about the actual popular vote totals. Because of the Electoral College, presidential candidates need to pay attention only to a limited number of states that can swing one way or the other. [18]
A November 6, 2016, episode of PBS NewsHour revealed that “Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton have made more than 90 percent of their campaign stops in just 11 so-called battleground states. Of those visits, nearly two-thirds took place in the four battlegrounds with the most electoral votes—Florida, Pennsylvania, Ohio, and North Carolina.” [19]
Gautam Mukunda, a political scientist at Harvard University, explains that states are given electors on the basis of their representation in the U.S. House and Senate, so small states get extra votes. Mukunda states, “The fact that in presidential elections people in Wyoming have [nearly four] times the power of people in California is antithetical at the most basic level to what we say we stand for as a democracy.” [33]
Con 2: The Electoral College is rooted in slavery and racism.
The “minority” interests the Founding Fathers intended the Electoral College to protect were those of enslavers and states with legal slavery. James Madison stated, “There was one difficulty however of a serious nature attending an immediate choice by the people. The right of suffrage was much more diffusive in the Northern than the Southern States; and the latter could have no influence in the election on the score of the Negroes. The substitution of electors obviated this difficulty and seemed on the whole to be liable to fewest objections.” [29]
“Behind Madison’s statement were the stark facts,” explains Wilfred Codrington III, assistant professor at Brooklyn Law School and a fellow at the Brennan Center for Justice:
The populations in the North and South were approximately equal, but roughly one-third of those living in the South were held in bondage. Because of its considerable, nonvoting slave population, that region would have less clout under a popular-vote system. The ultimate solution was an indirect method of choosing the president.…With about 93 percent of the country’s slaves toiling in just five southern states, that region was the undoubted beneficiary of the compromise, increasing the size of the South’s congressional delegation by 42 percent. When the time came to agree on a system for choosing the president, it was all too easy for the delegates to resort to the three-fifths compromise [counting only three-fifths of the enslaved population instead of the population as a whole] as the foundation. The peculiar system that emerged was the Electoral College.” [29]
The racism at the root of the Electoral College persists, suppressing the votes of people of color in favor of voters from largely homogeneously white states. [29] [30]
Con 3: The Electoral College undermines representative democracy and the notion of one person, one vote.
There are some 335 million people in the United States. But just 538 people decide who will be president. In 2016 Hillary Clinton won the popular vote by more than one million votes, and yet she still lost the election on the basis of electoral votes. [14] [35] [36] [37]
“Do we really want 538 Bob Nemanichs electing our president?…You can’t let 538 people decide the fate of a country of 300 million people,” says Robert Nemanich, a math teacher and former elector from Colorado Springs, Colorado. [28]
Even Donald Trump, who benefited from the Electoral College system, stated after the 2016 presidential election that he believed presidents should be chosen by popular vote: “I would rather see it where you went with simple votes. You know, you get 100 million votes and somebody else gets 90 million votes and you win.” Just as in 2000, when George W. Bush received fewer nationwide popular votes than Al Gore, Trump served as the president of the United States despite being supported by fewer Americans than his election opponent. [2] [20]
“If anything, representative democracy in the 21st century is about political equality. It’s about one person, one vote—everybody’s vote counting equally. You’re not going to convince a majority of Americans that that’s not how you should do it,” says Jesse Wegman, author of Let the People Pick the President (2020). [33]
John Koza, the chairman of National Popular Vote, warns, “At this point I think changing the system to something better is going to determine whether there’s a dictator in this country.” [27]