Albania
Students and teachers are banned from having cell phones during class.
Algeria
Cell phones are banned from schools.
Anguilla
Anguilla does not have a nationwide school cell phone policy but supports the development of policies by schools.
Antigua and Barbuda
Students may have cell phones in schools if the devices are turned off and out of sight.
Argentina
Cell phone policies are established by each province. Misiones allows cell phone use as a pedagogical tool. Buenos Aires has a tiered policy that bans primary school students from using cell phones during class and recess and requires secondary students to keep phones stored away. Catamarca has a complete ban.
Australia
Tasmania enacted the first statewide school cell phone ban in 2019 followed by Victoria , Western Australia , and the Northern Territory in 2022. In 2023 South Australia and New South Wales followed suit. The policies vary but generally restrict cell phone use during instruction. The Australian Capital Territory bans cell phones in grades 11 and 12 as of 2024. [60]
Austria
Austria does not have a nationwide cell phone policy for schools but encourages individual schools and teachers to create policies at their discretion.
Azerbaijan
Azerbaijan does not have a nationwide cell phone policy for schools, but the minister of science and education has indicated that a national policy is a possibility.
Bahrain
Cell phones are banned during exams.
Bangladesh
Bangladesh has banned students from using cell phones at school since 2011. Additionally, a 2010 study found that 75 percent of teachers in Bangladesh were using cell phones in the classroom, suspending instruction to have a phone conversation. As a result, teachers’ cell phone use in classrooms was also banned in 2011 by Education Minister Nurul Islam Nahid. In 2017 the rules were expanded to ban cell phones in classrooms altogether (teachers must leave their phones in the teachers’ lounge). [61] [62]
Barbados
Barbados had a school cell phone ban from 2009 through 2017. The ban was repealed, and a new ban has not been implemented.
Belarus
The Ministry of Education set regulations for cell phone use in class, indicating that the phones must be turned off and given to the teacher during class time except when being used for instruction (the country’s textbooks have QR codes to access more information). Students may use phones during breaks. [63]
Belgium
The government of the Wallonia-Brussels Federation (the federal governing body of the French-speaking residents of Brussels and Wallonia ) implemented a ban for the 2025–26 school year that applies to students up to their sixth year. The German-speaking community banned cell phones in schools from September 2025. The Flemish community has no cell phone bans in schools.
Benin
Benin does not have a nationwide cell phone policy for schools, but most schools ban cell phones.
Bhutan
Bhutan bans cell phones in schools.
Bolivia
Pres. Evo Morales ordered the Ministry of Education to ban cell phones in schools.
Brunei
The Ministry of Education issued a directive banning students from bringing cell phones to school.
Bulgaria
Students are banned from using cell phones during class time. The education minister has proposed a pilot program to test full cell phone bans in schools. [67] [68]
Burkina Faso
Cell phones are banned in secondary schools.
Cabo Verde
Cabo Verde does not have a nationwide cell phone policy for schools. Individual schools are encouraged to create their own policies.
Cambodia
Students are not allowed to use cell phones in classrooms or during study hours without permission from their teacher. [69] [70]
Cameroon
Cell phones are banned in high schools and colleges.
Canada
Bans are implemented by province. Nova Scotia and Saskatchewan ban cell phones during class for all K–12 students. Ontario and Manitoba have tiered systems based on grade levels. New Brunswick schools require students to place phones in designated areas on silent. In Alberta and British Columbia the school districts create their own policies. Prince Edward Island allows educational use in classrooms if students sign a responsible-use agreement. [71]
Cayman Islands
Cell phones are banned in public schools.
Central African Republic
The Central African Republic does not have a nationwide cell phone policy for schools. The school principal has autonomy to set school policy.
Chad
Cell phones are banned in public, private, and community schools.
Chile
On March 13, 2024, the Ministry of Education recommended that children ages 6–12 use cell phones for educational purposes with clear rules and education about risky behaviors. The ministry recommended that kids and teens ages 12–18 continue the use of cell phones for educational purposes, with more autonomy built into the lessons. [72] [73]
China
Children are not allowed to bring cell phones to school without written parental consent. [74]
Colombia
The Ministry of Education responded to individual school bans with the caution that schools and teachers be allowed to use cell phones in creative educational ways. [75]
Republic of the Congo
Individual schools manage student cell phone use in primary and secondary schools.
Costa Rica
Costa Rica’s Ministry of Public Education provided regulations for cell phones in high schools.
Côte d’Ivoire
Cell phones are banned in schools.
Cyprus
Cell phone use is banned in all secondary schools.
Denmark
The Danish government refrained from implementing a nationwide policy in 2023, leaving cell phone policies to individual schools.
Djibouti
Schools are responsible for making their own cell phone policies.
Dominica
Cell phones are banned in schools.
Egypt
On February 21, 2023, the Ministry of Education issued an immediate ban on cell phone use during school hours.
England
The Department of Education released guidance supporting the ban of cell phones in schools by head teachers. Legislation will be considered to enforce a ban if schools do not voluntarily enforce the guidance. [64]
Eswatini
Cell phone use is banned in schools.
Fiji
Students may only bring a cell phone to school with approval from a head teacher or principal and written consent from a parent or guardian.
Finland
Teachers are allowed to ask students to put away cell phones in their pockets or bags. The Finnish National Agency for Education has proposed legislation to further curb cell phone in schools. [65]
France
In France the cell phone ban applies to all students through collège (about age 15, or ninth grade in the U.S.). Students are prohibited from using phones on their school campus or during school activities off-campus. They also are not allowed to connect any device to the Internet. Students in lycée (U.S. grades 10–12) are subject to their individual institutions’ policies. [66]
Gabon
The Ministry of National Education was preparing a ban in 2018, but no legislation resulted.
Germany
Germany issued a nonbinding recommendation to schools to limit cell phone use in August 2023.
Ghana
Cell phones are banned in senior high schools as well as in technical and vocational institutions.
Greece
Students are not allowed to use cell phones during school hours, and teachers may only use them for instructional purposes. [77]
Guinea
Cell phones are banned in schools and educational establishments.
Guyana
Cell phone use and possession are banned in schools during class time and assemblies.
Hungary
Students must give their cell phones to a designated staff member at the beginning of the school day and may retrieve their devices at the end of the day. [78]
India
Cell phone policies are established by state. Delhi , Andhra Pradesh , and Uttar Pradesh ban cell phones on school premises for students and teachers. Rajasthan banned teachers’ use of cell phones in schools.
Iran
Cell phones are banned in classrooms.
Iraq
Cell phones are banned in all schools.
Ireland
The Irish government strongly recommends that schools enact and enforce cell phone policies.
Israel
In 2016 the Ministry of Education banned cell phone use during instruction until further guidance was issued, and the following year teachers were banned from using cell phones during teaching hours. Cell phones were banned in elementary schools in 2019. [79] [89]
Italy
A general cell phone ban was implemented in 2022, but exceptions were made for educational use.
Jamaica
Schools are responsible for making their own cell phone policies.
Japan
Schools are responsible for making their own cell phone policies.
Jordan
Cell phone use during classes is banned in schools.
Kazakhstan
Students are not allowed to use smartphones during school hours.
Kenya
Cell phone use in schools is banned, but a 2021 “Bring Your Own Device” policy is forcing an ongoing review of the policy.
Kuwait
Cell phones and smartwatches are banned in schools.
Kyrgyzstan
Cell phones may be used for educational purposes.
Latvia
Schools have until May 31, 2025, to implement cell phone bans for kids up to grade six with exceptions for educational use.
Lebanon
Lebanon’s National Educational Technology Strategic Plan stated, “To be mobile in a digital age means that students and teachers can keep their chosen devices with them at all times, and that the devices work wherever they happen to be.”
Luxembourg
The Ministry of Education banned cell phones from daycares and primary schools. Secondary schools are encouraged to adopt policies that ban cell phone use during instruction.
Mauritania
Cell phone use is banned in educational establishments.
Mauritius
Cell phone use is banned in primary and secondary schools during school hours and during exams.
Moldova
Cell phones are banned during instruction.
Mongolia
Cell phones are banned in schools.
Morocco
Cell phones are banned in classrooms.
Mozambique
Cell phones are banned in classrooms for both teachers and students.
Nepal
Cell phone use is banned in classrooms up to the plus-two level.
Netherlands
The Dutch government banned all devices in classrooms unless they are needed for instruction or medical reasons (including disabilities). [80]
New Zealand
Cell phones are banned in secondary school classrooms during school hours in all state schools and kura s ( Māori schools).
Niger
Cell phone use is banned in classrooms.
Nigeria
Cell phones are regulated at the state level. Osun and Jigawa banned cell phone use in secondary schools. Delta banned cell phone use in primary and secondary schools.
Niue
Niue High School (one of only three grade schools on the island) banned student cell phones on school property. Students must leave their cell phones at home.
North Korea
Cell phone use is encouraged for educational purposes.
North Macedonia
There is no nationwide cell phone policy for schools, but primary schools require students to store phones in their lockers during instruction.
Oman
Cell phones are banned in schools except for specific educational use.
Pakistan
Cell phone policies are set at the provincial and local level. The Khyber Pakhtunkhwa government banned cell phone use during school hours. The Sindh government banned cell phone use in schools.
Palau
Cell phones are banned in classrooms except for educational uses.
Paraguay
Cell phones must be stowed away unless being used for an educational purpose.
Portugal
Portugal’s government has strongly recommended a ban for grades one through six, but the decision is ultimately up to the schools. [81]
Qatar
Cell phone use is banned during instruction. A complete ban is strongly recommended.
Russia
Russia took a multistep approach to banning cell phones during classroom instruction beginning in 2021, with the final ban going into effect on September 1, 2024. Students’ phones must be stored in designated areas in locking phone pouches. [82]
Rwanda
Students are not allowed to bring cell phones to school. [83]
Samoa
Cell phone use is banned in schools.
Saudi Arabia
A cell phone ban was imposed in 2017. The ban was lifted in September 2024 and replaced with regulations that require cell phones to be stowed away for the whole school day.
Scotland
The head teacher (the equivalent of a principal in the United States) is responsible for the cell phone policy in each school. The Scottish government issued guidance on cell phone bans but left final decisions to head teachers.
Seychelles
Cell phone use during school hours is banned. Teachers may not have cell phones in classrooms.
Sint Maarten
Cell phones are banned from classrooms.
Slovakia
Cell phone use is banned in grades one through nine. Cell phones must be given to teachers or stowed away in backpacks.
South Korea
South Korea does not have a nationwide school cell phone policy, but the country announced a policy on November 15, 2024, that allows teachers to confiscate cell phones if students are being disruptive.
Spain
Bans are decided by autonomous regions and cities. Madrid , Galicia , Castilla-La Mancha, Valencia , Balearic Islands , and Extremadura all ban cell phones in schools. Ceuta , Melilla , Cantabria , Castilla y León, Aragón , and the Canary Islands have limited bans. Catalonia released guidance with a ban for kids under age 12. [84] [85]
Sri Lanka
Student cell phones are banned from schools. Teachers may not use cell phones in the classroom.
Sweden
Sweden implemented a cell phone ban that requires students to relinquish their cell phones to school staff during the school day, including during breaks in instruction. [86]
Switzerland
Switzerland has no nationwide school cell phone ban. Head of the Swiss Conference of Cantonal Ministers of Education Silvia Steiner believes that a nationwide ban is not needed, because schools have their own policies. However, a poll indicates that 82 percent of Swiss adults are in favor of banning cell phones in schools. [87] [88]
Tajikistan
Cell phone use by students and teachers is banned in general, primary vocational, and secondary vocational education schools. Additionally, cell phones may not be used in the learning process by students, graduate students, doctoral students, teachers, or other employees of universities.
Tanzania
Cell phones are banned in schools, with exceptions for educational pilot projects.
Togo
The Ministry of Primary, Secondary Education and Vocational Training (now the Ministry of Primary, Secondary, Technical Education and Crafts) banned the use of cell phones in primary, secondary, and vocational schools. [76]
Trinidad and Tobago
Cell phone use is banned during instruction unless authorized by the teacher. Cell phones are not allowed in exam rooms.
Tunisia
Cell phone use is banned for primary school students during regular school days. Cell phone use is banned for middle and high school students during exams. In 2024 Tunisia expanded the ban to include possession of smartphones in all schools and educational institutes.
Turkey
Students are allowed to bring their cell phones to school but must give them to their teacher during instructional time. Teachers are also expected to limit use of their own cell phones during class. [71]
Turkmenistan
No nationwide cell phone policy for schools. However, all schools in Turkmenistan have banned the use of cell phones by students and teachers during instruction.
Uganda
Students are not allowed to bring cell phones to school. [72]
Ukraine
No nationwide cell phone policy for schools. The national Ministry of Education banned cell phone use in 2007. That order was rescinded in 2014.
United Arab Emirates
Cell phone use is banned during exams in public and private schools, adult education centers, and home study. Cell phones are banned from schools.
Uruguay
Cell phone use is banned during instruction. Teachers and students must turn off cell phones during classes.
Uzbekistan
Everyone (students, teachers, and staff alike) are required to silence cell phones on school grounds. Students may use cell phones (calls, texts, etc.) for urgent needs to contact parents, close relatives, or school employees. Students may use phones without restrictions during emergencies.
Vanuatu
There is no nationwide cell phone policy for schools, but the Ministry of Education and Training proposed a ban in 2023.
Vietnam
Cell phone use is banned in classrooms except for educational purposes.