ARCHIVED TOPIC: This topic was archived on Oct. 14, 2020 and will no longer be updated.
In Mar. 2010, the U.S. Congress passed HR 3590, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA), and HR 4872, the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010. President Barack Obama signed both into law in late Mar. 2010. The PPACA included an individual mandate that imposed tax penalties on people who chose not to buy health insurance. On June 28, 2012, the US Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the PPACA in a 5-4 ruling. Proponents of the health care legislation, frequently referred to as Obamacare, have called it a historic political achievement and landmark legislation that reformed the US health care system by lowering health care costs, making health care more affordable, and protecting consumers. They cited the Congressional Budget Office estimates that it would reduce the nation’s deficit by about $210 billion. Opponents have called it a socialist and unconstitutional government takeover of the health care system that would increase the cost of health care, decrease the quality, and entrench a new entitlement. They said the law will increase the nation’s deficit $340-$700 billion over the next decade. In 2011 and 2012 the House of Representatives voted 36 different times to repeal or replace Obamacare.
Pro Quotes
Barack H. Obama, JD, 44th President of the United States, stated the following on the 7th anniversary of signing the Affordable Care Act, as quoted in a Mar. 23, 2017 article by Ryan Teague Beckwith titled “Read Barack Obama’s Statement on the Anniversary of Obamacare,” published at time.com:
“Thanks to this law, more than twenty million Americans have gained the security and peace of mind of health insurance. Thanks to this law, more than ninety percent of Americans are insured – the highest rate in our history. Thanks to this law, the days when women could be charged more than men and Americans with pre-existing conditions could be denied coverage altogether are relics of the past. Seniors have bigger discounts on their prescription drugs. Young people can stay on their parents’ plans until they turn 26 years old. And Americans who already had insurance received an upgrade as well – from free preventive care, like mammograms and vaccines, to improvements in the quality of care in hospitals that has averted nearly 100,000 deaths so far.
All of that is thanks to the Affordable Care Act. And all the while, since the law passed, the pace of health care inflation has slowed dramatically. Prices are still rising, just as they have every year for decades – but under this law, they’ve been rising at the slowest rate in fifty years. Families who get coverage through their employer are paying, on average, thousands of dollars less per year than if costs kept rising as fast as they were before the law. And reality continues to discredit the false claim that this law is in a ‘death spiral,’ because while it’s true that some premiums have risen, the vast majority of Marketplace enrollees have experienced no average premium hike at all. And so long as the law is properly administered, this market will remain stable. Likewise, this law is no ‘job-killer,’ because America’s businesses went on a record-breaking streak of job growth in the seven years since I signed it.
So the reality is clear: America is stronger because of the Affordable Care Act.”
Joe Biden, 2020 presidential candidate and Vice President under President Obama, stated on a page titled “Health Care” on his campaign website, joebiden.com (accessed Dec. 10, 2019):
“On March 23, 2010, President Obama signed the Affordable Care Act into law, with Vice President Biden standing by his side, and made history. It was a victory 100 years in the making. It was the conclusion of a tough fight that required taking on Republicans, special interests, and the status quo to do what’s right. But the Obama-Biden Administration got it done.
Today, the Affordable Care Act is still a big deal. Because of Obamacare, over 100 million people no longer have to worry that an insurance company will deny coverage or charge higher premiums just because they have a pre-existing condition – whether cancer or diabetes or heart disease or a mental health challenge. Insurance companies can no longer set annual or lifetime limits on coverage. Roughly 20 million additional Americans obtained the peace of mind that comes with health insurance. Young people who are in transition from school to a job have the option to stay covered by their parents’ plan until age 26.”
Ezekiel J. Emanuel, MD, oncologist and chair of the Department of Medical Ethics and Health Policy at the University of Pennsylvania, wrote in a Mar. 22, 2019 article titled “Name the Much-Criticized Federal Program That Has Saved the U.S. $2.3 Trillion. Hint: It Starts with Affordable,” available at statnews.com:
“Barack Obama pledged on the campaign trail and as president that he would sign a health care bill that lowered family health insurance premiums by $2,500. Conservative politicians and pundits roundly mocked him. Yet the ACA has more than delivered on that promise, saving about $4,000 per family. And these lower health care premiums probably contribute to the recent rise in workers’ wages…
Despite constant criticism and occasional sabotage, the Affordable Care Act has successfully expanded health insurance coverage — even though it included individuals with pre-existing conditions — and controlled runaway health care costs. We need to build on its tremendous cost-control success.”
Con Quotes
Donald Trump, 45th President of the United States, stated the following during the Oct. 9, 2016 presidential debate at Washington University in St. Louis, MO, a transcript of which is available at nytimes.com:
“Obamacare is a disaster. You know it, we all know it. It’s going up at numbers that nobody’s ever seen, worldwide…
Obamacare will never work. It’s very bad, very bad health insurance. Far too expensive. And not only expensive for the person that has it, unbelievably expensive for our country. It’s going to be one of the biggest line items very shortly.
We have to repeal it and replace it with something absolutely much less expensive and something that works, where your plan can actually be tailored. We have to get rid of the lines around the state, artificial lines, where we stop insurance companies from coming in and competing, because they want — and President Obama and whoever was working on it — they want to leave those lines, because that gives the insurance companies essentially monopolies. We want competition…
President Obama said you keep your doctor, you keep your plan. The whole thing was a fraud, and it doesn’t work.”
Roger Stark, MD, healthcare policy analyst for the Washington Policy Center, wrote in an Oct. 25, 2019 article available at washingtonexaminer.com:
“Every single Democratic presidential candidate has joined President Trump. They all agree that Obamacare is a failure…
One thing that all the candidates have in common is that they don’t support the Affordable Care Act in its present form. They either want to radically restructure and expand Obamacare or they want to abolish it entirely and force Americans into a single-payer plan that they have rebranded as ‘Medicare for all.’
Obamacare was already in an obvious downward spiral even before the 2017 congressional tax reform legislation essentially eliminated the individual mandate. With or without the mandate, the ACA has failed miserably at holding down healthcare costs and achieving universal health insurance coverage.”
Joseph Jarvis, MD, public health consulting physician and former State Health Officer at the Nevada Division of Health, wrote in a June 21, 2019 op/ed titled “The Affordable Care Act Isn’t so Affordable, So, What Is?,” available at deseret.com:
“Middle-class families across the United States who have no employment-based health benefits are increasingly finding the cost of health insurance offered under the aegis of the so-called Affordable Care Act to be, well, unaffordable…
The Affordable Care Act is not affordable. It also didn’t protect any patients. But then, it never was about cost or quality. The legislation was principally aimed at providing coverage for uninsured Americans. And there it failed as well. Even with optimal implementation, tens of millions of Americans, mostly middle-class, were left behind without health financing.”