Current Project Pop-Up Locations
Explore the diverse and dynamic businesses, art installations, and exhibitions that have come to life through Project Pop-Up. These participants are bringing new energy to Downtown Pittsburgh with their unique contributions and creative offerings.
339 Forbes Ave
Curated selection of yoga essentials, wellness products, and mindful living accessories designed to support your practice and everyday well-being.
201 Smithfield Street
Breakfast and lunch, coffee shop, and artisanal charcuterie boards and fine foods. Catering options available.
215 Smithfield Street
A collaborative initiative between Greenwood Plan and Cocoapreneur, hosting Black-owned businesses in the storefronts of this historic building.
This multi-site urban gallery exhibition created in collaboration with Silver Eye Center for Photography features the works from emerging Pittsburgh artists, transforming vacant storefronts in Downtown into an outdoor art experience.
Various works by Evangeline Mensah-Agyekum 529 Liberty Avenue As a self-taught artist, Mensah-Agyekum primarily works with photography, fashion, and film. Evangeline draws inspiration from the banalities of daily life and the Black experience to explore Blackness, womanhood, and the unique intersections of identity. Much of her work aims to capture individuals, in part by transforming them, portraying undaunted characters through their vulnerability.
Legacy (2018) by Anqwenique Kinsel 604 Liberty Avenue Anqwenique is a versatile artist and educator known for her talents in opera, classical, jazz, and soul music. As the founder and director of Groove Aesthetic, she delves into contemporary performance and collaborative processes. Legacy pays tribute to the legendary Leontyne Price, the first African American operatic soprano to achieve international recognition.
Stay Awhile (2023) by Sobia Ahmad 817 Liberty Avenue Ahmad’s ongoing body of work centers on Pando, an ancient aspen tree grove in south-central Utah, believed to be over 10,000 years old. Unified by a single immense root system, Pando stands as the earth’s oldest and heaviest living organism, embodying interconnectedness and oneness. Ahmad’s art explores the transcendental power of everyday experiences, objects, and practices through various slow and contemplative processes.
“Send My Love to the Hill” Artworks by Charlese Dawson and poem by Jhordan Price 421 Seventh Avenue This photobook of poetry takes audiences on a tour through the Hill District through the lens of people who are a part of the community. Send My Love to The Hill is a love letter to this historic black community that has nurtured both Dawson’s artistry and humanity. Appropriately, this installation is only yards away from the August Wilson African American Cultural Center whose esteemed namesake described life in The Hill over decades and generations.