Marta Krechkovsky
First Violin
Snapp Family First Violin Chair
Ukrainian violinist Marta Krechkovsky joined the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra at the beginning of the 2014-2015 season. An experienced performer of orchestral and chamber music, she has participated in numerous music festivals such as Pacific Music Festival and Verbier Festival where she has served as a concertmaster. She also took part in Miyazaki International Music Festival and was invited to perform with World Orchestra for Peace as a tribute to Sir Georg Solti on the occasion of the 100th anniversary of his birth. She is currently a violinist with the Grand Teton Music Festival in Jackson Hole, Wyoming.
An active chamber musician, Marta Krechkovsky has appeared in New York’s concert halls such as Carnegie's Weill Recital Hall, Lincoln Center's Alice Tully Hall and Bargemusic in Brooklyn, as well as Kitara Chamber Music Hall in Sapporo, Japan. A few chamber music highlights include performances with Yo-Yo Ma, Julian Rachlin and St. Lawrence String Quartet at the Grand Teton Music Festival, as well as Augustin Hadelich, Narek Hakhnazaryan, Benjamin Grosvenor and Pablo Sáinz-Villegas.
Marta Krechkovsky is a member of the Clarion Quartet, a quartet formed by members of the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra that specializes in “Entartete Musik.” Clarion Quartet’s debut album, Breaking the Silence , was released in February of 2018 on the TYE/Naxos label.
Marta Krechkovsky became a prizewinner at Kocian International Violin Competition in Czech Republic at the age of 10 and was a top-prize winner at Canadian Music Competition in Montreal. As a soloist, Krechkovsky has appeared with numerous orchestras in her native Ukraine, including the Lviv State Symphony Orchestra.  She performed Bach's Double concerto with Joshua Bell and Verbier Festival Chamber Orchestra during their Asia tour and in 2021 performed Tchaikovsky’s Violin Concerto with the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra.
Marta Krechkovsky began studying violin at the age of six with her father, Orest Krechkovsky. She received her earlier training at Young Artists Performance Academy at the Royal Conservatory of Music in Toronto, where she studied with Atis Bankas. She holds Bachelor of Music and Master of Music degrees from The Juilliard School where she studied with Glenn Dicterow, and a professional studies degree in orchestral performance from the Manhattan School of Music where she studied with Glenn Dicterow and Lisa Kim.