Dylan Naroff
Assistant Concertmaster
Dylan Naroff began playing the violin at age three, initially studying with his mother. When he was 13, he toured Chile and Argentina as a member of the San Jose Youth Symphony. Those experiences solidified his love for music and passion for orchestra. Dylan joined the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra in 2022. In November of 2023, he was appointed Assistant Concertmaster by Manfred Honeck. Prior to this, he was a member of the Fort Worth Symphony Orchestra for one season.
In 2013, Dylan won the silver medal at the Fischoff National Chamber Music Competition, and has collaborated with members of the Tokyo and Vermeer Quartets. During the summers, Dylan plays with the Sun Valley Music Festival. As a student, he attended the Mozarteum Academy, Keshet Eilon Mastercourse, and the New York String Orchestra Seminar, and also spent three indispensable summers at the Meadowmount School of Music under Ann Setzer.
He was awarded the Young Artist Award from the Interlochen Arts Academy and later received his Bachelor of Music from Indiana University where he studied with Alexander Kerr. As concertmaster of IU’s Philharmonic Orchestra, Dylan worked very closely with Jorja Fleezanis, and collaborated with many of the world’s leading conductors. While at IU, he developed a deep appreciation for opera and in 2018, helped lead the joint world premiere of Mason Bates’ Grammy award-winning opera, The (R)evolution of Steve Jobs. Also through the Jacobs School of Music, he was granted the opportunity to work in Germany as a guest musician with the Deutsche Oper Berlin.
Dylan is a certified Suzuki teacher who is committed to his students and their musical journeys. He has worked with the Inner City Youth Orchestra of Los Angeles (ICYOLA) and public school systems across Southern California, in addition to the Three River Arts Young People’s Orchestras in Pittsburgh (TRYPO). His latest book project explores a fresh approach to violin technique for developing artists. Born in Raleigh, North Carolina, Dylan grew up in San Jose, CA where he studied with Jenny Rudin. In his free time, he enjoys cooking, writing, and Iyengar yoga.
Email: dylannaroff@me.com