Yeokyung Kim
Second Violin
Yeokyung Kim who won her position as second violin at the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra in 2020 and is an internationally active violinist. She has been performing in countries such as the U.S.A., South Korea, Canada, France, Austria, Belgium, Germany, Armenia, Scotland and Ireland as a soloist, a chamber musician and as an orchestral musician. She has shared stages with internationally-acclaimed artists including Anthony Marwood, Martin Beaver, Robert Mcduffie, Kyungsun Lee and Kurt Sassmannshaus. Kim captivates audiences with compelling stage presence and wows the audiences with her originality, sincere artistic interpretations and exciting techniques.
Kim was born in Daegu, South Korea and grew up in Seoul before moving to Los Angeles to further her musical journey. She holds degrees from Seoul National University and Colburn School where she was a recipient of full scholarships. During her educational years, Kim has performed in master classes by Pinchas Zukerman, Christian Tetzlaff, Jaime Laredo, Glenn Dicterow and Lewis Kaplan. Kim’s early awards include prizes from Dong-A Competition, the Korea Music Newspaper Competition, Korea Music Association of Korea Competition, the Music Association of Daegu Competition, Ewha Kyung-Hyang Competition, and Taegu Broadcasting Corporation Competition. Kim has participated in the several international summer music festivals as a fellowincluding the Music Academy of the West, Bowdoin Music Festival, Gamper Music Festival and Great Mountains Music Festival.
Yeokyung Kim came to light as a charismatic soloist in 2004, when she made her debut with Seoul Philharmonic Orchestra. She continued her musical career as soloist through performances with Delirium Musicum, Seongnam Philharmonic Orchestra, Seoul Virtuosi String Ensemble, Seoul National University Philharmonic Orchestra, SNU String Ensemble and Daegu Philharmonic Orchestra. She was featured in other American and Korean concerts organized in venues such as the Walt Disney Concert Hall, Santa Barbara Bowl, Heinz Hall, Andy Warhol Museum, Seoul Arts Center, Sejong Center, Seongnam Art Center and Kumho Art Hall.
As an avid chamber musician, Yeokyung Kim was a member of the Amoroso String Quartet and a member of Seoul Virtuosi from 2014-2017. After moving to Los Angeles in 2017, Kim has been a member of the Delirium Musicum and performed many innovative and fun outreach concerts throughout Los Angeles.
An enthusiast of orchestral repertoire, Yeokyung Kim has held concertmaster and principal positions at Seoul National University Philharmonic Orchestra, Colburn Orchestra, Music Academy of the West Orchestra and the Bowdoin Festival Orchestra. In 2019, Yeokyung was invited to tour in 10 European cities with the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra, led by the conductor Manfred Honeck. With the Pittsburgh Symphony, Kim performed in internationally popular venues such as the Elbphilharmonie, the Philharmonie in Berlin, the Musikverein in Vienna, the Royal Concertgebouw in Amsterdam, and the Philharmonie de Paris.
View Yeokyung Kim's YouTube page →