Micah Wilkinson
Principal Trumpet
Martha Brooks Robinson Principal Trumpet Chair
Micah Wilkinson was appointed principal trumpet of the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra by Music Director Manfred Honeck in September 2017 and holds the Martha Brooks Robinson Principal Trumpet Chair. He has enjoyed a varied career as an orchestral musician, soloist, chamber artist, and teacher.  Wilkinson came to the Pittsburgh Symphony from the San Diego Symphony, where he served as principal trumpet for three years. He previously held positions with the Houston Symphony, the San Francisco Symphony, the Oregon Symphony and the Tucson Symphony. He performed recently in subscription programs as Guest Principal Trumpet with the New York Philharmonic, Chicago Symphony Orchestra and the Seoul Philharmonic.
As a featured soloist, Micah Wilkinson has been praised for "taming the brilliance he employs so well in many massive orchestrations to that gentle, liquid line." ( San Diego Story ) In the 2021-2022 season, he made his Pittsburgh Symphony concerto debut, performing Haydn's Trumpet Concerto and premiering Anthony Plog’s Scherzo for Trumpet and Orchestra. “The character of his playing was delightful, with sublimely lyrical phrases and a bright, nimble approach to the quicker bits.” ( Pittsburgh Post-Gazette )
As a chamber musician, Micah Wilkinson has been recognized for his "complete confidence and refreshing catalogue of contrasting colors" ( San Diego Story ) and has been frequently featured on NPR's Performance Today. Professional summer festival appearances have included the Aspen Music Festival, Chautauqua Institute, Sun Valley Festival, Cabrillo Festival, Brevard Music Center, Round Top Institute, Bellingham Festival of Music and Astoria Music Festival.
As an educator, Micah Wilkinson strives to help the next generation of brass players to find their own unique voices as musical artists. He is quickly becoming one of the most sought-after instructors for trumpet in the United States and enjoys working privately with students at his home studio in Pittsburgh and online through virtual platforms. He recently edited and released two solo collections for trumpet, the "Book of Solos" and the “Book of Arias,” which include his commentary on performance practice and historical context.
In the summers, Micah Wilkinson has taught at the Aspen Music Festival, Chautauqua Institution School of Music, Round Top Festival Hill Institute and the Brevard Music Center. He has also served on the faculties of the University of Houston and Portland State University, and has presented master classes and clinics for colleges and universities all over the United States, Europe and Asia.
Micah Wilkinson grew up in Norcross, Georgia. A proud graduate of St. Olaf College in Northfield, MN, he pursued additional studies at Arizona State University and the Staatliche Hochschule für Musik in Freiburg, Germany. His primary teachers include Martin Hodel, David Hickman, Larry Black and Anthony Plog. He lives in the South Hills of Pittsburgh with his wife Stefani and daughters Eleanor and Amelia.
Website | Instagram