Marylène Gingras-Roy
Acting Assistant Principal Viola
A native of Quebec City, the violist Marylène Gingras-Roy has been a member of the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra since 1997, and she is currently the acting assistant principal.
Marylène Gingras-Roy is an avid chamber-music performer and maintains a full teaching schedule as Adjunct Professor of Viola at Duquesne University, at her private home studio, and as a viola coach for the Three Rivers Young Peoples Orchestra and the Pittsburgh Youth Symphony.
She has taught at many summer music festivals, including Cap des Laurentides and Domaine Forget, Québec, Interharmony International Music Festival in Germany and Italy, Advanced Chamber Music Seminar in Pittsburgh, Sun Valley Music Institute in Idaho, and Zodiac Music Festival in France. She was also given master classes at the Cleveland Institute of Music, West Virginia University, Carnegie Mellon University and at summer festivals.
Marylène Gingras-Roy has been featured as a soloist with the Pittsburgh Symphony at many occasions, with the Duquesne University Orchestra and different youth symphonies in Pittsburgh.
Marylène Gingras-Roy has participated in many festivals, including the Festival dei Due Mondi in Spoleto, Italy, the Solti Project at Carnegie Hall, the Jerusalem Music Festival, the Jeunesses Musicales World Orchestra, Steamboat Springs and Buzzards Bay Musicfest, the Pittsburgh New Music Ensemble, and since 2000 at the Sun Valley Summer Symphony in Idaho.
She studied at the Conservatoire de Musique de Québec with Douglas McNabney and Francois Paradis and graduated in 1993 with unanimous First Prizes in both viola and chamber music. As a recipient of Canada and Québec Arts Councils’ Scholarship Grants, she was able to attend the Harid Conservatory with Victoria Chiang and the renowned Curtis Institute of Music with Karen Tuttle and Joseph DePasquale, where she earned an Artist Diploma in 1997.
Marylène Gingras-Roy’s recordings of chamber music include Leo Zeitlin’s Yedish songs and the Caprichos Nos. 2-4 by Leonardo Balada (world premiere recording) for the Naxos label, Philip Thomson’s Separate Self, Joe Engel’s chamber music for the Pittsburgh Jewish Music Festival, and also the Serenade No. 6 for Trombone, Viola and Cello by Vincent Persichetti.
Marylène Gingras-Roy’s viola is by Italian maker Umberto Muschietti (1929).