Bronwyn Banerdt
Cello
Bronwyn Banerdt joined the cello section of the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra in 2014.  She made her solo debut with Los Angeles Philharmonic in 2002 and has since appeared in concert throughout the United States, Europe, Russia and southern Africa. Notable solo appearances include performances with the Houston Symphony, Albany Symphony and the world premiere of Poem for Cello & Orchestra by Michael Kamen. At age 15, Banerdt was personally invited by the world-renowned composer John Rutter to perform the solo from his “Requiem” in Carnegie Hall. Banerdt was awarded Grand Prize at the Los Angeles Philharmonic’s Bronislaw Kaper Awards, and she has also captured top prizes at the Houston Symphony Ima Hogg Competition and Kingsville Music Competition.
Equally passionate about chamber music and orchestral performance, Bronwyn Banerdt has co-founded two uniquely focused chamber music ensembles with other members of the Pittsburgh Symphony. The Clarion Quartet specializes in “Entartete Musik”—music written by oppressed composers—and seeks to bring light to artists whose legacies would be silenced. The Pittsburgh Cello Quartet offers an eclectic mix from classical to pop and rock in unique arrangements for four cellos. Banerdt has collaborated with renowned artists such as Kim Kashkashian and Mitsuko Uchida, and members of the Emerson, Guarneri, Juilliard, Borodin and Orion string quartets. She has performed at numerous chamber music festivals including Marlboro Music and Music from Angel Fire. Before joining the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra, Banerdt was a member of the prize-winning Trio Terzetto and performed as a substitute with many of the great orchestras of the world, including the New York Philharmonic, Philadelphia Orchestra, Cleveland Orchestra, Detroit Symphony and Lyric Opera of Chicago. Banerdt serves as artist lecturer in chamber music at Carnegie Mellon University.
A native of Los Angeles, Bronwyn Banerdt earned her bachelor’s degree at age 19 from the USC Thornton School of Music, where she studied with Ronald Leonard. She subsequently studied at The Curtis Institute of Music with David Soyer and received her master’s degree from The Juilliard School with Richard Aaron.
Bronwyn Banerdt plays a Montagnana model cello made by Mario Miralles in 1998.