Cecee Pantikian
Second Violin
New York-based violinist Cecee Pantikian joined the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra as a second violin in September 2020. As a sought-after orchestral musician, Pantikian has been invited to perform as a substitute violin with the New York Philharmonic, among others. Since 2016 Pantikian has also played on Broadway as a substitute on Aladdin, Hello Dolly, SpongeBob, Kiss Me Kate and as a first violin member of the Radio City Christmas Spectacular during the 2018 and 2019 holiday seasons. She was guest concertmaster at the Illinois Symphony Orchestra and principal second violin with International Chamber Soloists under the direction of Dmitri Berlinsky. Pantikian has also toured with Verbier Festival Chamber Orchestra under music director Gabor Takacs Nagy and Verbier Festival Orchestra under the baton of Charles Dutoit, with whom Pantikian has also collaborated at the Miyazaki Music Festival; associate concertmaster with the Artosphere Festival Orchestra; first violin at Sun Valley Summer Festival and as associate concertmaster with the Philharmonic Orchestra of the Americas. Pantikian has also been a member of the Glimmerglass Festival Orchestra since 2018.
In 2003, Cecee Pantikian made her Carnegie Hall, Isaac Stern Auditorium debut, performing Khachaturian’s Violin Concerto with the Senior Concert Orchestra of New York under the baton of David Gilbert. Having established herself as a reputable young soloist, Pantikian has also appeared with orchestras including the Sofia Philharmonic Orchestra performing the Brahms Violin Concerto and Mozart’s Sinfonia Concertante; Chelsea Symphony Orchestra; Bozeman Symphony Orchestra performing the Conus Violin Concerto; Manhattan School of Music Philharmonic Orchestra; Musica Bella Orchestra performing Sibelius’ Violin Concerto and Symphony in C and the Vivaldi Concerto for 4 violins.
Cecee Pantikian was a participant at a number of prominent festivals and academies including Pinchas Zukerman’s Young Artist Program of the National Arts Center of Canada, Itzhak Perlman’s Chamber Music Program, Verbier Festival, Artosphere Festival and the Miyazaki Music Festival. She has studied with renowned musicians Pinchas Zukerman, Glenn Dicterow, Lisa Kim, Patinka Kopec and Albert Markov. Cecee Pantikian holds a B.M., M.M. and a Professional Studies Certificate in Orchestral Performance from the Manhattan School of Music.