As a recitalist, Ms. Berry has appeared at various summer festivals including The Franz-Schubert-Institut, Brevard Music Center, Songfest, Toronto Summer Music Festival, and Source Song Festival. She also has been a part of concert series including the Butler County Symphony Summer Lunchtime Concerts, Penn State Honors Music Institute, Music at the George Eastman House, and the Cleveland Trombone Institute. Her collaborative partners include Alexandra Rose Hotz, soprano, Susannah Stewert, soprano, Bergsvein Toverud, tenor, Christina Tanisch-Smith, soprano, and Mark Lusk, trombone.
Ms. Berry has studied song repertoire with acclaimed musicians including Elly Ameling, Roger Vignoles, Julius Drake, Helmut Deutsch, Wolfram Rieger, Graham Johnson, Martin Katz, Warren Jones, Margot Garrett, Andreas Schmidt, Brigid Steinberger, and Robert Holl. She has also worked with esteemed composers including Jake Heggie, Libby Larsen, Tom Cipullo, Ben Moore, David Conte, and John Musto. Her most recent project included a complete performance of Tom Cipullo’s vocal and piano cantata, “A Visit with Emily,” during her first doctoral recital in May 2022.
Growing up in western Pennsylvania, Maeve began her piano studies at the age of 5. She holds a bachelor’s degree in piano performance as well as a Master of Music in Piano Accompanying and Chamber Music from the Eastman School of Music. Ms. Berry is currently pursuing a Doctor of Musical Arts at Eastman where she serves not only as a studio accompanying graduate assistant but also as a music theory teaching assistant. Her instructors include David Allen Wehr, Dr. Christopher Guzman, and Dr. Andrew Harley.
While at Eastman, Ms. Berry has received several awards for excellence in vocal collaboration including the Barbara M. Koeng Award and the Jean Barr Award. Along with these academic awards, she also won the Pianist Prize in the 2023 Jessie Kneisel Lieder Competition with her two singers Meg Brilleslyper (1st vocal prize) and Alexandra Rose Hotz (2nd vocal prize). ​
Ms. Berry's residency is generously sponsored by Steven Siebert.