Nighttime Economy
The Office of Nighttime Economy (ONE) is the primary liaison between hospitality and nightlife businesses, their surrounding community groups and residents, and other City of Pittsburgh departments.
As part of a Sociable City Plan, the office was created in 2013 to address the complex issues required to sustain a safe and vibrant social experience for residents and visitors.
Vision Safe and vibrant places to socialize for visitors and Pittsburghers of all ages, cultures and lifestyles.
Mission To retain and grow the value of the social and nighttime economy; encourage safe operations of food, beverage and entertainment businesses; and facilitate collaborative co-existence with communities in which they operate.
Pittsburgh’s burgeoning hospitality scene is a vital component to Pittsburgh’s economy – employing nearly 60,000 workers in our region and generating millions in city revenue.
This office works to support not just the nighttime economy but “life at night” – including many Pittsburghers who work, play and live their lives outside of a 9-5 schedule (Think of industries like healthcare, hotels, Fedex, Amazon, Airport employees, janitorial workers, security and more.)
Our Staff
Allison Harnden Nighttime Economy Manager Allison.Harnden@pittsburghpa.gov C: 412-400-9007
Bret Kunash Nighttime Economy Coordinator Bret.Kunash@pittsburghpa.gov O: 412-255-2380
Business at Night
The Office of Nighttime Economy supports economic development of the hospitality industry through small business technical assistance, commercial district support and community resource compilation.
Looking to open or expand a food, beverage or entertainment business? We can help. Whether you are a start-up hospitality business or a nightlife veteran, we welcome your questions.
Need the “101” to starting your hospitality business in Pittsburgh? Thinking of locating in a specific neighborhood? Contact us for a Hospitality Business Orientation and Commercial District contacts.
Getting Started
Relevant Nightlife Permits, Ordinances & Codes
For Employees
Night Industries Training & Education (NITE School)
Office of Nighttime Economy can organize free trainings for business owners and their employees. Nighttime Industries Training & Education includes recorded operational info sessions on How to get an Outdoor Dining Permit, Food Truck Operation, Plastic Bag Ban and more. - Contact Office of Nighttime Economy for schedule.
Safety trainings include:
Newsletter
Stay Informed – Subscribe to ONE’s newsletter for monthly updates on business grants, notices of permitting/compliance/operation requirements or changes, free trainings and marketing opportunities.
Social Media
Follow the Office of Nighttime Economy on Facebook and Instagram to keep up-to-date on everything happening with Pittsburgh's nightlife and food, beverage and entertainment businesses!
last updated: 05/15/2025