Our hands-on learning programs for students K-12 are teacher friendly, address academic standards and use art, history, and nature to understand different times and contexts.  Frick programs address cross curricular standards, integrating writing, art, science and even economics to broaden student perspectives.
If you're interested in bringing your students to The Frick, our 2025-2026 School Programs Booklet is the best place to start the planning process. The booklet contains all of the information you need to plan an exciting, engaging field trip for your students, including program descriptions by grade level, lunch information, and tips for booking. By popular demand, we have also added an a la carte option that allows you to customize your own field trip experience! Download your free copy below.
What You Need to Know
Book early! Certain times of the year (like December and May) filly more quickly than others. Call or email at least six weeks before your preferred date.
Not sure which program is best for you? We are happy to talk with you to customize a program to fit your classroom’s needs.
Only interested in touring one of our museums? Check our pricing and a la carte options in the School Program Booklet!
The earliest time that programs begin is 9:30 a.m.
Occasionally, certain programs may be temporarily unavailable due to special events, special exhibitions, or closures onsite.
Contact us
To request a school program for your students, please submit a school field trip request form. Please note that space is limited and we recommend that you contact us at least one month prior to your preferred date.
COVID-19 Policies
As part of our continued commitment to keeping our staff and visitors safe and to limit the spread of COVID-19 in our community, The Frick Pittsburgh has put the following policies in place:
For on-site school programs, the Frick will defer to each school’s masking policy for their students. KN95 masks are available on-site by request.
The Frick Pittsburgh follows the CDC’s guidance for COVID-19 transmission levels in Allegheny County. If transmission levels in Allegheny County are designated as high at the time of a scheduled school program, we request that all students and chaperones wear masks when indoors at the Frick.
Whenever possible, students participating in art projects will be provided with their own set of clean art supplies.
If you are unable to make it to the Frick for an in-person visit, we are happy to talk with you about digital options. For more information about virtual learning with the Frick, please contact Stacey McSorley, Manager of Youth and Family Programs, at
. In your email, please be sure to include the following information:
Your name and contact information, including email and phone number
Name of the school
Grade level of students
The subject matter you are interested in (i.e. art, history, etc)