To prevent the capture of Jerusalem by the knights of the First Crusade, King Idreno has sent the sorceress,  Armida, into the world to seduce the Christian heroes and turn them from their duty. The bravest of these, Rinaldo, has fallen under Armida's spell. She comes to love him so deeply that she cannot bring herself to destroy him.
Act 1 Scene 1: A council chamber in the royal palace of Damascus.
King Idreno is alarmed by news that the crusaders have crossed the Jordan River. He offers his kingdom and Armida’s hand in marriage to the Christian knight Rinaldo if he agrees to fight against his fellow Christians. Enchanted and obsessed with Armida, Rinaldo vows to betray his men and his faith. Meanwhile, Armida, tormented by her passionate love for Rinaldo, pleads with the gods for his safety.
Scene 2: A mountainside.
The knights Ubaldo and Clotarca plan to rescue Rinaldo from Armida’s enchantment. Idreno sends Zelmira, the daughter of the Sultan of Egypt, to ensnare the Christians. However, upon encountering Clotarca, Zelmira falls in love with her, despite her better judgment, and offers to lead her to safety.
Scene 3: Armida's apartments.
Rinaldo admires the bravery of Idreno’s approaching forces. Ubaldo warns Rinaldo about Armida’s charms and chastises him for abandoning his Christian duty. Though remorseful, Rinaldo remains unable to break free from Armida’s enchantment.
Act 2 Scene 1: Back in the council chamber.
Zelmira fails to dissuade Idreno from planning an ambush of the crusaders. Idreno pretends to agree to Clotarca's demand that the Christian knight enchanted by Armida be freed. Though the spell is broken, Rinaldo reluctantly leaves with Ubaldo. Armida expresses her fury.
Scene 2: Back at the mountainside.
Ubaldo welcomes Rinaldo back as he prepares to rejoin the crusaders in battle. Armida arrives, pleading for refuge and Rinaldo’s love. Rinaldo, torn but resolute, departs for battle with Ubaldo, leaving Armida betrayed and alone.
Act 3
Scene 1: A dark, forbidding grove, with a large myrtle tree.
Rinaldo, aware that the myrtle tree holds the secret to Armida’s powers, enters the grove to destroy it. Zelmira and a group of nymphs appear, attempting to persuade him to return to Armida. As Rinaldo raises his weapon to strike the myrtle, a disheveled Armida emerges from the tree and confronts him. Unable to kill Rinaldo despite her fury, she watches as he strikes the tree, causing the magic wood to fall lifeless. As Rinaldo tries to escape, he declares to still love her. Armida, consumed by fury, turns into a monster of rage, destroying all in her path.
Courtesy of Pinchgut Opera