Connecting Staff. Supporting Community.
Staff Council is the voice of staff at CMU. Representatives are elected from every school and campus unit to ensure staff perspectives are part of the conversation. During their two-year terms, they collaborate with university leadership, share staff feedback and help shape meaningful initiatives that impact our community.
Our mission is to advocate for all CMU staff by listening to concerns, elevating ideas and working together to create a stronger, more inclusive university. Staff Council contributes to the vibrancy and well-being of the Carnegie Mellon community by promoting open communication, collaboration and continuous improvement.
CMU 32nd Annual Food Drive for the Greater Pittsburgh Food Bank
Our annual food drive is one important way the university demonstrates its commitment to the community and that commitment has grown exponentially over the years...
Join the CMU Staff Councl in fighting hunger & achieving CMU 2025 Food Drive goals:
$100,000 to support Greater Pittsburgh Community Food Bank
250 can openers to be donated directly to the CMU Food Pantry
Other nonperishables for Greater Pittsburgh Community Food Bank - with a special focus on peanut butter - stay tuned for updates!
Donate today https://pittsburghfoodbank.org/cmu32
Learn more CMU 32nd Annual Food Drive
Plan to attend one or more of CMU’s 32 nd Food Drive Events!
Event
Where
When
Official Start - Give Online at the Andy Awards Reception
CUC
Wed 10/01 from 1pm to 2pm
Tartans Tuesday Student Engagement Event
Alumni House
Tues 10/07 from 12pm to 5pm
Drive & Drop
East Campus Garage
Tues 10/21 from 11am to 1pm
Food Drive Fall Fest
Merson Courtyard
Wed 10/29 from 12pm to 2pm
Benefits & Fitness Fair
CUC 2 nd floor
Wed 11/05 from 10am to 2pm
As chairs and co-chairs of the drive, we want to thank you in advance for your continued generosity!
Carole Panno, Chair, Staff Council Food Drive Committee Jim Garrett, Honorary Chair Star Broadus, Co-Chair Charlene Payne Parrish, Co-Chair
Staff Council July Meeting with President Jahanian
President Jahanian met up with Staff Council at the July Staff Council General Body Meeting to review current CMU events.  Thank you to all who participated in Staff Council's annual meeting with President Jahanian!
Stay Engaged
Know your Staff Council representatives!
Inviting All CMU Staff Members to