Sixty years after its publication in 1956, Allen Ginsberg ’s “Howl” still echoes loudly. Not only did it alter the landscape of mid-20th-century poetry , but it also sounded a clarion call for the counterculture that followed and raised consciousness for generations to come. Arguably, however, its publication in Howl and Other Poems (part of the Pocket Poet Series put out by Lawrence Ferlinghetti ’s City Lights Books) was no greater a landmark event than either Ginsberg’s first earth-shaking public performance of the poem in 1955 or the 1957 trial in which a San Francisco Bay-area district attorney—outraged by “Howl”’s candid description of illegal drug use and homosexuality, graphic language, and profanity—sought to ban the distribution of Howl and Other Poems as obscenity.
Ginsberg’s reading of “Howl” at the Six Gallery in San Francisco on October 7, 1955, put the Beat movement on the literary map forever. That night Kenneth Rexroth hosted and Philip Whalen , Gary Snyder , Michael McClure, and others also read poems, but it was Ginsberg who brought down the house, vociferously cheered on by Jack Kerouac (still awaiting the publication of his classic novel On the Road ) as he circulated jugs of wine among the audience. A day later, Ferlinghetti sent Ginsberg a telegram requesting a copy of the poem.
In March 1957, 520 copies of Howl and Other Poems bound for London were impounded by the San Francisco customs collector; in June undercover law officers arrested a City Lights clerk for selling the book; and in August a Bay-area assistant district attorney, Ralph McIntosh, put Ferlinghetti on trial for distributing obscenity. Having heard the testimony of a parade of scholars who attested to “Howl”’s literary worth—and mindful of legal precedent relating to a similar attempt to ban the publication of James Joyce ’s Ulysses —Judge Clayton W. Horn dismissed the case, deciding that “Howl” was not without “redeeming social importance” and did not have a “substantial tendency to deprave or corrupt its readers by inciting lascivious thoughts or arousing lustful desires.”
In “Howl” Ginsberg passionately and viscerally declaims what he saw as the soulless, materialist, money-obsessed obscenity of American society and commemorates those who suffered from and railed against it. Coming as it did during the waning stages of Sen. Joseph McCarthy ’s communist witch hunts and at the height of the gray-flannel conformity, Ginsberg’s bohemian rhapsody was a shocking cry of outsider dissent from the celebration of the never-had-it-so-good prosperity of the post-World War II United States . A plea for tolerance in a distinctly intolerant era, “Howl” was also Ginsberg’s in-your-face declaration and celebration of his homosexuality .
Suffused with sexuality and spirituality, horror and humor, despair and hope, “Howl” is profane and profound, a gainsay and a goof. Like much of Beat literature , it is grounded in autobiography, chronicling the experiences of Ginsberg and friends (especially in Part I) in an attempt to illuminate universal experience. It was inspired and informed by the long-lined cataloguing of Walt Whitman (adopted by Ginsberg as voluminous “who”-introduced subordinate clauses), the syncopated rhythmic drive of the bebop jazz of Lester Young and Charlie Parker , and what Ginsberg called “Hebraic- Melvillean bardic breath” (each line of “Howl” was conceived as a “single breath unit”).
The tripartite structure of the poem is perhaps most succinctly summarized by Judge Horn in his decision:
The first part of "Howl" presents a picture of a nightmare world; the second part is an indictment of those elements in modern society destructive of the best qualities of human nature; such elements are predominantly identified as materialism, conformity, and mechanization leading toward war. The third part presents a picture of an individual who is a specific representation of what the author conceives as a general condition.
The “Footnote to Howl” seems to be a declamation that everything in the world is holy, including parts of the body by name. It ends in a plea for holy living.
Moloch , Ginsberg’s all-purpose symbol for evil (corporate greed, expansive militarism, oppressive government, and so on) arose from a peyote -inspired vision in which Ginsberg saw the Sir Francis Drake Hotel and the Medical Arts Building in San Francisco merge into an image of the ancient god Moloch. It is also helpful to know that Carl Solomon, to whom “Howl” is dedicated, was a patient at the Columbia Presbyterian Psychiatric Institute whom Ginsberg came to know while he too was a patient there. If you have never experienced “Howl,” be wary of the advice with which William Carlos Williams concluded his introduction to the Howl collection: “Hold back the edges of your gowns, Ladies, we are going through hell.”