Welcome to the Student Academic Success Center!
Our work to support success focuses on creating spaces for students to engage in their coursework and approach to learning through many group and individual program options.
We support student success by providing academic coaching, subject-specific tutoring, effective communication strategies, accommodations for students with disabilities, and language support for multilingual learners. We also engage with faculty and with staff to improve the coordination and professional development for academic advisors.
Not sure what program is right for you? Take a look at what we offer below to find out more information.
Course Support
Supplemental Instruction (SI) is an academic support model that utilizes peer-assisted study sessions. The SI program provides regularly scheduled review sessions on course materials outside the classroom. SI is a non-remedial approach to learning as the program targets high-risk courses and is available in select courses based on data related to past student performance and feasibility.
Peer Tutoring consists of ongoing individualized and small group sessions for students seeking support related to their coursework. You can utilize tutoring to discuss course related content, clarify and ask questions, work through practice problems, etc.
Drop-In Tutoring targets our highest demand courses through regularly scheduled open tutoring sessions during the fall and spring semesters. You are not required to commit to regular attendance, and you can come as needed throughout the semester. You can utilize Drop-In Tutoring to discuss course related content, clarify and ask questions, work through practice problems, and stay to do work. (this program returns in the fall)
Skill Building (e.g., Time Management, Organization)
Academic Coaching provides holistic one-on-one peer support and group workshops to help undergraduate and graduate students find and implement their conditions for success.
Academic Coaching Workshops help students improve their time management, productive habits, organization, stress management, and study skills. We collaborate with various graduate and undergraduate programs to offer workshops in a variety of study skills topics. Students can choose to attend one or more workshops that are available year-round.
Communication Support
Communication Support has trained consultants who are ready to help individuals and small groups with any written, verbal, or visual project. If you’re conveying ideas to another person, we’ll help you make sure those ideas are clear and communicated effectively.
Make an appointment with a Communication and Language Support Consultant to get individualized support on language or cross-cultural issues.
Language Support
Language and Cross-Cultural Support has consultants who can help multilingual students with second language acquisition needs in writing, speaking, and reading.
Make an appointment with a Communication and Language Support Consultant to get individualized support on language or cross-cultural issues.
International Teaching Assistant (ITA) Certification
The SASC is charged with certifying the language of International Teaching Assistants (ITAs), ensuring that nonnative English speakers have the language proficiency needed to succeed as teaching assistants in the Carnegie Mellon classroom.
Apply for ITA Certification
Tartan Scholars
The Tartan Scholars program is specifically designed to meet the unique needs of high-achieving student leaders with limited resource backgrounds
Disability Resources
I'm Not Sure
If you are not sure what kind of support you are looking for and you would like to connect with a professional staff member, please schedule a virtual consultation appointment .
Other Support & Resources
Beyond the Student Academic Success Center
The Student Academic Success Center is but one of many campus resources that students can access. We encourage you to become familiar with our partner offices to widen your circle of care.