Life at CMU
What is life at CMU? It's everything.
Class work and new experiences with new people. Research and self reflection. Study groups and social gatherings. Failing and being okay with that because you grew from it. Breaking boundaries and building friendships. Leaps and bounds but also baby steps. Challenging yourself and embracing self-care. Changing the world and opening your mind, and heart, to others different from yourself.
It's people and places and experiences — that is life at Carnegie Mellon University.
Our Students
CMU students come from all over the world. They are change makers, doers, artists, industry starters, disrupters, entrepreneurs, thinkers and leaders. They are also learning about themselves as humans, building relationships with each other, experiencing the ups and downs of life, carving paths on campus and in the world and engaging in the CMU experience in unique and personal ways.
Our undergraduate and graduate students are at the core of all we do in Student Affairs. Who they are as people and the things they care about inspire daily life on campus. We celebrate that by supporting their work and sharing some of their stories.
Our Initiatives and Programs
Student Affairs programs, initiatives and resources are offered to support and foster our undergraduate and graduate students' intellectual and personal growth and to help you explore and experience the different aspects of college life. We care about you, your studies, your social growth, your well-being and your future. We want to help you enjoy a great Carnegie Mellon experience. Here are a few examples of how we do that.
Newsletters
Some Student Affairs departments distribute digital newsletters that students can opt into. Explore these options and sign up for content that interests you.
Be Well Newsletter
A monthly newsletter about well-being, religious, and spiritual life events, news, and resources.
Sign up
CaPS D-List
Keep up with the latest events, announcements, groups and programs from Counseling and Psychological Services (CaPS).
Sign Up
Center for Student Diversity and Inclusion Newsletter
Bi-weekly newsletter sharing events and programs from the Center for Student Diversity and Inclusion.
Sign up
Nexus of Civic Engagement Newsletter
Weekly newsletter on civic engagement opportunities.
Sign up