Painting The Fence
The Carnegie Mellon Student Government is dedicated to maintaining a clean and safe Fence. Please help us by adhering to the rules.
Who can paint The Fence?
The Fence may only be painted by Carnegie Mellon University-affiliated students. [Article II.D.6]
Only students guarding The Fence, and those with whom they are willingly associating, may paint The Fence. [Article II.D.6]
The Fence is considered guarded when at least two students are in the surrounding gravel area. [Article II.D.6.a]
How can you paint The Fence?
The Fence may only be hand-painted with paint brushes. [Article II.D.1.a]
No other tools such as spray paint or rollers and no other actions like dumping or smearing paint are permitted. [Article II.D.1.b]
The Fence must be completely covered with paint; partial paintings are considered vandalism. [Article II.D.1.c]
When can you paint The Fence?
The Fence must be painted between midnight to sunrise. [Article II.D.5]
Any painting outside that timeframe is considered vandalism, excluding any corrective work to undo vandalism. [Article II.D.5]
How do we keep The Fence area clean?
All paint and painting materials must stay in the gravel area surrounding The Fence, and any paint outside this area is considered graffiti. [Article II.D.2-3]
Those painting The Fence will be liable for cleanup of all resources used in painting The Fence. [Article II.D.4]
For the full set of rules, check out the Student Government’s Graffiti and Poster Policy .
Concerns at The Fence
Respect for fellow students and The Fence itself is key to ensuring this time-honored tradition continues. Student Government is committed to making sure all students and student organizations can freely participate in the tradition of painting The Fence.
The Fence has, at times, been a flashpoint for discourse and a source of conflict. The Poster Policy Arbiter (PPA) is a student employed by Student Government to intake any concerns surrounding The Fence, help identify possible solutions, and encourage open and restorative dialogue among impacted students. By informing Student Government about possible violations of the Poster Policy or instances of conflict at The Fence, CMU community members help us to keep painting The Fence a positive experience for all.
Concerns about The Fence can be reported to the Poster Policy Arbiter and Student Government through one of the following methods:
Email (not anonymous): You can report incidents directly by emailing us . The Poster Policy Arbiter will follow up with further communication.
[coming soon!] Intake Form (anonymous): If you prefer to remain anonymous, please use our Intake Form to report any incidents. While your identity will not be recorded to ensure privacy, please note that anonymity will limit the potential for restorative dialogue. However, follow-up may still be possible as deemed appropriate by the PPA.
History of The Fence
How It Started
Did you know that The Fence was actually not a meeting place for Carnegie Tech men and Maggie Mo women? The history of The Fence is often shrouded in misinformation. After university archives and student research, the earliest documented reference to the idea of “a fence” was in 1913. However, with major world events and ebbing interest, the building of The Fence was pushed to 1923 when the class of 1923 built what they referred to as the Senior Fence. Originally, The Fence was built for seniors, by seniors.
Reinforcing The Fence
During the days of the Senior Fence, the main tradition was for seniors to sit at the fence and celebrate their time on campus; non-seniors would be reprimanded for attempting to do so. However, that tradition slowly faded away, giving way to the tradition we know and love today – painting The Fence. Though there is not a specific year in which our tradition started, by the 1960s the tradition was in full-swing.
After many decades (and layers of paint), in 1989, the west end of the Fence collapsed and was replaced with pressure-treated lumber and concrete. In 1993, the east end of The Fence followed suit. While the original Senior Fence may no longer exist, today we have The Fence, not just for seniors, but for all students at Carnegie Mellon University.