Become a member of the Monteverdi Society by:
Giving in Your Will. Name Pittsburgh Opera in your will, notify us in writing that you have done so, and you become a member immediately of the Monteverdi Society – no need to let us know the amount.
Giving in Your Estate Plan. Establish an estate plan, in consultation with your financial and legal advisers, name Pittsburgh Opera as at least one of the beneficiaries, notify us, and become a member of the Monteverdi Society – you receive many immediate and long-term benefits.
Giving a Gift of Retirement Assets , such as pension plans or IRAs, may allow you to give more than you thought possible, while reducing taxes that may otherwise consume these assets for your heirs.
Giving a Gift of a Life Insurance Policy you may no longer need or a new policy is a wonderful way to leave your legacy for Pittsburgh Opera.
Giving a Charitable Gift Annuity provides you with a fixed -lifetime payments, tax deduction savings, and a gift to Pittsburgh Opera.
Giving a Charitable Remainder Trust provides income for life or a term of years, a charitable income tax deduction for a portion of your gift to the trust and a gift to Pittsburgh Opera through the, the accumulated principal or "remainder interest" after the trust terminates.
Giving a Gift of Real Estate through the retained life estate allows you to give your home to Pittsburgh Opera while retaining the right to continue living there for the rest of your life. You will receive a charitable deduction based on the fair market value of your home minus the present value of the life tenancy you have retained.
Giving a Charitable Lead Trust generates income for Pittsburgh Opera now, while reducing your tax costs for transferring assets to the next generation. The lead trust holds gift assets for your lifetime or for a term of years, and pays annual income to Pittsburgh Opera. When the trust terminates and the assets pass to your family, all intervening appreciation will escape gift and estate tax.
To discuss how your legacy gift will ensure Pittsburgh Opera’s future excellence and how to go about making your gift, please contact:
Anita Sammartino Monteverdi Society Advisor 412-742-7151 Contact Anita via email