Pittsburgh's unique topographic blend of steep, winding hills and flat river areas makes it one of the best cities for cycling enthusiasts.
1. Frick Park
The largest of Pittsburgh's regional parks , Frick Park boasts an extensive system of trails throughout steep valleys and wooded slopes. Frick Park stretches from Point Breeze in the North, down to the Monongahela River on its southern border and is the perfect quiet escape from the hustle and bustle of the city.
2. Schenley Park
Schenley Park can be found in the Oakland neighborhood and houses Phipps Conservatory , the Schenley Park Café, Bob O' Connor Golf Course, and the Schenley Oval Sportsplex, not to mention a number of interconnected and sprawling trails waiting to be explored.
3. Highland Park
Water is the main focus of this historic park, as it is home to Pittsburgh reservoirs, a fountain and reflecting pool at its entrance, a swimming pool, Lake Carnegie, as well as the Pittsburgh Zoo and PPG Aquarium . This park also features the Reservoir Loop, a bike track, and many trails connecting all parts of the park.
One of Pittsburgh's outdoor claims to fame is The Great Allegheny Passage, also known as the GAP Trail, a 150 mile connection from Pennsylvania to Maryland. The trail passes through Cumberland Narrows, crosses the Mason-Dixon Line, snakes across the Laurel Highlands through Ohiopyle State Park, and ends right in Downtown Pittsburgh at the beautiful Point State Park.
Branching off of the GAP Trail is the Montour Trail, which extends from Coraopolis, PA to Clairton, PA. The Montour Trail connects Pittsburgh International Airport to the GAP, which ultimately connects as far south as Washington, D.C.
6. Three Rivers Heritage Trail
Lining the banks of Pittsburgh's famous three rivers, the Three Rivers Heritage Trail is a popular system of trials that is use for exercise, recreation, and provides a safe route for bike commuters. Enjoy a scenic ride along one of Pittsburgh’s beautiful riverfronts. There is really no wrong choice.
7. Main Line Canal Greenway
The 320-mile trail that connects Pittsburgh to Harrisburg follows the historic path of the Main Line Canal Greenway. The focus of the trail is to create a connection that is not only physical, but also a human connection that is as unique as the land and countryside that surrounds it.