The Allegheny County Parks offer a variety of year-round recreational activities including golf , fishing, swimming, kayaking, skiing, youth sports and much more. These parks total 12,000 acres and receive 22 million visits per year! Each of the nine parks has something unique and exciting waiting to be explored! Learn more here . Boyce Park encompasses 1,096 acres in Monroeville and Plum and is home to the only downhill skiing and snowtubing hills available in Allegheny County. Other amenities include ballfields, a wave pool, trails, a skate park, archery range, shelters and a nature center. Deer Lakes Park encompasses 1,180 acres in Frazer and West Deer townships and features three fishing lakes as well as an observatory, spray park, shelters, a disc golf course, playgrounds, a multipurpose field, and walking, hiking and jogging trails. Harrison Hills Park encompasses 500 acres in Harrison Township and features an environmental learning center, shelters, a scenic overlook, playgrounds, soccer fields, ponds, a birding area, and walking, hiking and bridle trails. Hartwood Acres Park encompasses 629 acres in Hampton and Indiana townships and offers free concerts on Sunday evenings from June through August. Other amenities include Hartwood Mansion tours, teas, an off-leash dog area, and cross-country skiing, walking, hiking and bridle trails. North Park encompasses 3,075 acres in Hampton, McCandless and Pine townships. The largest of the nine county parks, North Park also features a 65-acre lake with fishing and kayaking, a golf course, pool, ice rink, ballfields, nature center, shelters, off-leash areas, dek hockey rink, and trails. Round Hill Park encompasses 1,101 acres in Elizabeth Township and features an exhibition farm with animals that is open every day of year. Other amenities include soccer fields, shelters, a spray park, and walking and bridle trails. Settlers Cabin Park encompasses 1,610 acres in Collier, North Fayette and Robinson townships and features a historic log cabin, wave pool, dive pool, shelters, tennis courts, playgrounds, dek hockey rink, and walking and hiking trails. South Park encompasses 2,013 acres in Bethel Park and South Park Township. The second largest county park, South Park features free concerts on Friday evenings from June through August. Additional amenities include a golf course, ballfields, wave pool, shelters, skate park, trails, nature center, dek hockey rink, and ice rink. White Oak Park encompasses 810 acres in White Oak and offers a multi-purpose athletic field, shelters, a wedding garden, playgrounds, off-leash area, bocce courts, volleyball courts, horseshoe pits, and walking and hiking trails.