Fort Pitt Block House
Built in 1764, it is the only surviving structure of the original Fort Pitt , and is the oldest building in Pittsburgh. It tells the story of western Pennsylvania's role during the French & Indian War and the American Revolution. Musket balls and rifle locks are two of the featured artifacts on display.
PPG Place and Market Square
There's no cost to walk around beautiful Market Square and PPG Place, located next to each other in the heart of Downtown. You might see fountains going off in the summer, ice skaters and holiday lights in the winter, plus artisan markets, live music, a holiday shopping village and more in this happening area.
Dollar Bank Cinema in the Park
Bring your blanket and some snacks and enjoy free Cinema in the Park ! This program takes over local parks throughout the city to show free movies. Each location offers something different, whether you want to be in the heart of the action at Schenley Plaza or just take in scenic views from the West End Elliott Overlook.
Final Fridays
Mingle with some of the top artists and entrepreneurs in the city each month at the glittering Rose Way for Final Fridays , located right by The Warhol! Rainbow walls, live music and a canopy of lights make this free event one of the best secrets in Pittsburgh. A cash bar and food truck is also available.
Trundle Manor
When I asked the ChatGPT AI the top hidden gem in Pittsburgh, Trundle Manor was the top answer! A self-styled tourist trap, take a personal tour of the bizarre collection of taxidermy, weapons, medical devices and much more. While the tour is free, donations are appreciated!
Kelso Museum
The Pittsburgh Theological Seminary has had biblical archaeology as a focus since 1908, eventually expanding into the Kelso Museum that highlights daily life in ancient times for those in modern day Israel, West Bank and Jordan. Admission and lectures are all free.
The Strip District
The smells and sights are always free in the Strip , a vibrant, walkable neighborhood full of international food, fresh markets, local beverages and tons of shopping. The Strip is a great stop any time of year even if you're just browsing.