The medieval city, from fortress to emporium
In Latin Europe neither political nor religious reforms could sustain the Roman regime. The breakdown of public administration and the breach of the frontier led to a revival of parochial outlook and allegiance , but the focus was not upon the city. Community life centered instead on the fortress (e.g., walled city), whereas the civitas was attached to the precincts of the episcopal throne, as in Merovingian Gaul .
Early medieval society was a creation of camp and countryside that fulfilled the local imperatives of sustenance and defense. With Germanic variations on late Roman forms, communities were restructured into functional estates , each of which owned formal obligations, immunities, and jurisdictions. What remained of the city was comprehended in this manorial order, and the distinction between town and country was largely obscured when secular and ecclesiastical lords ruled over the surrounding counties—often as the vassals of Germanic kings ( see manorialism ). Social ethos and organization enforced submission to the common good of earthly survival and heavenly reward. The attenuation of city life in most of northern and western Europe was accompanied by provincial separatism, economic isolation, and religious otherworldliness. Not before the cessation of attacks by Magyars, Vikings , and Saracens did urban communities again experience sustained growth.
Recovery after the 10th century was not confined to the city or to any one part of Europe. The initiatives of monastic orders, seigneurs, or lords of the manor, and merchants alike fostered a new era of increased tillage, craftsmanship and manufacturing, a money economy, scholarship, growth of rural population, and founding of “new towns,” as distinguished from those “Roman” cities that had survived from the period of Germanic and other encroachments. In almost all the “new” medieval towns, the role of the merchant was central in catalyzing the long-distance trade of commodities and staple goods.
Before the year 1000, contacts with rich Byzantine and Islamic areas in the Levant had revitalized the mercantile power in Venice , which grew wealthy from its command of the profitable route to the Holy Land during the Crusades . Meanwhile, merchant communities had attached themselves to the more-accessible castle towns and dioceses in northern Italy and on the main routes to the Rhineland and Champagne. They later appeared along the rivers of Flanders and northern France and on the west-east road from Cologne to Magdeburg ( see Hanseatic League ). In all of these towns, trade was the key to their growth and development.
It was no coincidence that the 12th and 13th centuries, which saw the founding of more new towns than any time between the fall of Rome and the Industrial Revolution , also witnessed a singular upsurge toward civic autonomy . Throughout western Europe, towns acquired various kinds of municipal institutions loosely grouped under the designation commune . Broadly speaking, the history of the medieval towns is that of the rising merchant classes seeking to free their communities from lordly jurisdiction and to secure their government to themselves. Wherever monarchical power was strong, the merchants had to be content with a municipal status, but elsewhere they created city-states. Taking advantage of renewed conflict between popes and emperors, they allied with local nobility to establish communal self-government in the largest cities of Lombardy , Tuscany , and Liguria . In Germany the city councils sometimes usurped the rights of higher clergy and nobility; Freiburg im Breisgau obtained its exemplary charter of liberties in 1120. The movement spread to Lübeck and later to associated Hanse towns on the Baltic and North seas, touching even the Christian “colonial” towns east of the Elbe and Saale rivers. In the 13th century the great towns of Bruges , Ghent , and Ypres , creditors of the counts of Flanders , virtually governed the entire province . In France , revolutionary uprisings, directed against nobility and clergy, sometimes established free communes, but most communities were content with a franchise from their sovereign—despite their limitations compared with the relative liberty of English boroughs after the Norman Conquest . Finally the corporate freedom of the towns brought emancipation to individuals. When bishops in the older German cities treated newcomers as serfs, the emperor Henry V affirmed the principle Stadtluft macht frei (German: “City air brings freedom”) in charters for Speyer and Worms ; such new towns, founded on the lands of lay and clerical lords, offered freedom and land to settlers who took up residence for more than “a year and a day.” In France the villes neuves (“new towns”) and bastides (medieval French towns laid out on a rectangular grid) likewise conferred rights on servile persons.
In the 14th century the growth of urban centers subsided as Europe suffered a series of shocks that included famine from 1315 to 1317, the emergence of the Black Death , which spread across Europe starting in 1347, and a period of political anarchy and economic decline that continued through the 15th century. Turkish encroachments on the routes to Asia worsened conditions in town and country alike. Europe turned inward upon itself, and, except for a few large centers, activity in the marketplace was depressed. At a time when local specialization and interregional exchange required more-liberal trade policies, craft protectionism and corporate particularism in the cities tended to hobble the course of economic growth . The artisan and laboring classes, moreover, grew strong enough to challenge the oligarchical rule of the wealthy burghers and gentry through disruptions such as the Revolt of the Ciompi (1378), while social warfare peaked in peasant uprisings typified by the Jacquerie (1358), but these tended to be short-lived revolts that failed to bring enduring social change . The era of decline was relieved, some argue, by the slow process of individual emancipation and the cultural efflorescence of the Renaissance , which effectively grew out of the unique urban environment of Italy and was strengthened by a high regard for the Classical heritage. These values laid the intellectual basis for the great age of geographic and scientific discovery exemplified in the new technologies of gunpowder , mining , printing , and navigation . Not before the triumph of princely government, in fact, did political allegiance, economic interests, and spiritual authority again become centered in a viable unit of organization, the absolutist nation-state .
The city and the nation-state
The virtue of absolutism in the early modern period lay in its ability to utilize the new technologies on a large scale. Through the centralization of power, economy, and belief, it brought order and progress to Europe and provided a framework in which individual energies could once more be channeled to a common end. While the nation stripped the cities of their remaining pretensions to political and economic independence (heretofore symbolized in their walls and tariff barriers), it created larger systems of interdependence in which territorial division of labor could operate. National wealth also benefited from the new mercantilist policies, but all too often the wealth generated by cities was captured by the state in taxes and then dissipated—either in war or by supporting the splendor of court life and the Baroque glory of palaces and churches. Only in colonial areas, notably the Americas, did the age of expansion see the development of many new cities, and it is significant that the capitals and ports of the colonizing nations experienced their most rapid growth during these years. Under absolutist regimes, however, a few large political and commercial centers grew at the expense of smaller outlying communities and the rural hinterlands.
By the 18th century the mercantile classes had grown increasingly disenchanted with monarchical rule. Merchants resented their lack of political influence and assured prestige , and they objected to outmoded regulations that created barriers to commerce—especially those that hindered their efforts to link commercial operations with improved production systems such as factories. Eventually, the merchants would unite with other dissident groups to curb the excesses of absolutism, erase the vestiges of feudalism, and secure a larger voice in the shaping of public policy. In northwestern Europe, where these liberal movements went furthest, the city populations and their influential bourgeois elites played a critical role that was disproportionate to their numbers. Elsewhere, as in Germany, the bourgeoisie was more reconciled to existing regimes or, as in northern Italy, had assumed a passive if not wholly parasitical role.
With the exceptions of Great Britain and the Netherlands, however, the proportion of national populations resident in urban areas nowhere exceeded 10 percent. As late as 1800 only 3 percent of world population lived in towns of more than 5,000 inhabitants. No more than 45 cities had populations over 100,000, and fewer than half of these were situated in Europe. Asia had almost two-thirds of the world’s large-city population, and cities such as Beijing (Peking), Guangzhou (Canton), and Tokyo (Edo) were larger than ancient Rome or medieval Constantinople at their peaks.