Iron Dome ,  short-range mobile air defense system developed for Israel by Rafael Advanced Defense Systems and Israel Aerospace Industries, with additional support from Raytheon . First deployed in 2011, Iron Dome constitutes the innermost layer of the tiered Israeli air defense network.
The 2006 Lebanon War made clear the need for Israel to develop a more effective air defense system. During that conflict, Hezbollah militants fired more than 100 rockets per day into Israeli territory and the occupied Golan Heights , thoroughly overwhelming Israel’s existing air defenses. Nautilus, an antimissile laser weapon that had been under joint development with the United States , was canceled because of budget overruns and inconsistent performance in combat conditions. In February 2007 the Israeli defense minister Amir Peretz authorized Rafael to begin development of a short-range air defense system on a budget of just $100 million. The project had to overcome strong institutional resistance within the Israel Defense Forces (IDF). The Israeli military establishment tended to favor offensive weapon platforms, such as tanks and combat aircraft , over purely defensive systems. Iron Dome completed its first successful field test in March 2009, and the first Iron Dome battery was deployed outside Beersheba in March 2011. From proposal to deployment, Iron Dome’s entire development cycle was slightly more than four years, a remarkably short period for a new weapon system.
The purpose of Iron Dome is threefold: detection of incoming airborne threats, assessment of their likely point of impact, and interception. Each element of the Iron Dome system was designed to focus on one aspect of this mission. An all-weather fire control radar system detects and tracks potential targets at ranges of 2.5–43 miles (4–70 km). A battle management computer determines whether the incoming rocket or missile will land in an inhabited area. If the projectile likely poses no threat to life or infrastructure , it is disregarded, and an interceptor is conserved. The most conspicuous part of Iron Dome is the interceptor launcher, which contains up to 20 Tamir missiles. A typical Iron Dome battery is equipped with three or four such launchers.
From the outset, Iron Dome was intended to be effective but also economical, and that guiding principle is apparent in both its design and its operation. The entire system is highly portable, and the truck-towed launchers do not require specialized transports to relocate them. The battle management system ensures that only active threats are engaged, thus reducing Iron Dome’s operating expense. Perhaps most notably, the Tamir interceptor costs as little as $40,000 per missile. By comparison, the AMRAAM interceptors used in the U.S. and Norwegian National Advanced Surface-to-Air Missile System (NASAMS) cost at least $1 million apiece. This massive cost difference can be explained largely by Iron Dome’s rather specialized role within Israel’s air defense network. NASAMS was designed to oppose a broad range of airborne threats, including cruise missiles and fixed-wing aircraft, while Iron Dome was created as a direct counter to the short-range artillery rockets fielded by Hezbollah and Hamas . The Katyusha rockets that make up the bulk of Hezbollah’s arsenal as well as the Qassam rockets commonly used by Hamas are unguided and follow a predictable flight path once launched. Against those threats, Iron Dome has performed admirably. The system’s first successful interception in battlefield conditions came in April 2011, when a battery near Ashkelon downed a rocket fired from the Gaza Strip .
The system’s first real test came in November 2012 during a conflict between Israel and Hamas. More than 1,500 rockets were fired into Israel over the course of eight days. Iron Dome assessed that nearly 900 would land in open terrain . Of the remainder, the IDF boasted an interception rate above 85 percent. In July 2014 Israel initiated an offensive into the Gaza Strip that lasted nearly two months. Some 2,100 Palestinians and more than 70 Israelis were killed in the ensuing conflict. Of the 4,500 rockets and mortars fired into Israeli territory during the 2014 Gaza war, roughly 800 were identified as threats and more than 90 percent of these were intercepted.
A naval version of Iron Dome (dubbed C-Dome) was unveiled with a live-fire test in 2017, and in 2019 the United States Army purchased a pair of Iron Dome systems. Both of those batteries were leased back to Israel during the early weeks of the Israel-Hamas War . October 7, 2023, the opening day of that conflict, saw Hamas launch some 2,200 rockets from Gaza in just 20 minutes as a precursor to an unprecedented ground offensive into southern Israel. The IDF’s 10 Iron Dome batteries struggled to cope with a barrage of this scale, and casualties from rocket strikes made up some of the 1,200 people estimated to have been killed on October 7.