Exploring Bali, the land of a thousand temples
Tour of Hindu temples in Bali, Indonesia.
Contunico © ZDF Studios GmbH, Mainz
Transcript
NARRATOR: Bali is known as the land of a thousand temples. But, in fact, the island has more than 10,000 temples. The best way for some tourists to see many of the island's breathtaking temples is to hire a driver, particularly those who aren't used to driving on the left. And without any signs, it's easy to get lost and end up off the beaten track. Hiring a car has another advantage: The driver ensures that the good spirits are on your side every morning. The view from the Jeep transports visitors back in time to a land that time forgot. We're visiting the water temple north of Ubud. An ancient legend has it that the God Indra himself created the source of these waters. It's said that he split the Earth and the waters of eternal life came pouring forth. The people of Bali attribute magical healing powers to this water. It's like a fountain of youth. The sanctuary here was built in the 10th century. Today, an entire village has come to bathe. Water plays a very important role in Balinese Hinduism. It is a sacred elixir. CHANG (translation): "So we're now going straight to Watukaru Temple. It's one of the island's most important temples, at the foot of a volcano, in the heart of the jungle. This is one of the six holiest temples on the whole of Bali." NARRATOR: Bali, island of the gods. Religion permeates every aspect of existence on the island. Life and faith go hand in hand. Around 95 percent of Bali's population are practicing Hindus. An important ceremony is taking place today in Watukaru Temple. It's a ritual celebrating the forest and nature. A sort of Thanksgiving Day, honoring the power of nature. Ceremonies, rituals and festivals determine life on Bali. Bali's temples have a birthday every 210 days. The occasion is marked with a three-day ceremony. There's always cause for celebration. These dance performances are a sort of mass. The Barong dance is a seven-act drama. It tells the story of the balance between good and evil. Honoring the gods through dance is just part of everyday life here in the land of a thousand temples.