How Beauty Looking Back reflects Japanese history
Hishikawa Moronobu's Beauty Looking Back exemplifies the changing lifestyles, artwork, and fashion of Japan's Tokugawa period.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Transcript
Beauty Looking Back may appear to be a simple portrait of a well-dressed woman. But it represents something much larger than just one person.This single image exemplifies the changing lifestyles, artwork, and fashion of Japan’s Tokugawa period. The Tokugawa period is also referred to as the Edo period. This was a time of internal peace and economic growth under the conservative Tokugawa shogunate. To control the public, the shogunate designated walled areas inside cities for pleasure centers. These areas were filled with brothels, teahouses, and Kabuki theaters. This environment gave rise to ukiyo-e, a new form of Japanese artwork. The word ukiyo came from Buddhism. It originally referred to the fleeting nature of life. During the Tokugawa period, the character for “transitory” was swapped out for the homonym meaning “ephemeral.” This ukiyo referred to the free-flowing nature of urban life.Hishikawa Moronobu is widely considered the first master of ukiyo-e. Hishikawa painted Beauty Looking Back in 1690.Beauty Looking Back captures the fashions of the time. The subject’s back is to the viewer, allowing for a full display of her elaborate hairstyle and embroidered kimono. The Tokugawa period was a golden era for nihongami. Hairstyles were a visible marker of one’s place in society. In Beauty Looking Back, the woman’s intricately looped hair is secured with combs. This hairstyle was popular with the wealthy and fashionable.The woman’s clothing also exhibits the tastes of the time. Her bright red furisode is embellished with chrysanthemums and cherry blossoms. Furisodes were traditionally worn only before marriage.Hishikawa was known for his command of nuihaku. He likely used this decorative technique on the woman’s furisode.Today Beauty Looking Back belongs to the Tokyo National Museum. While admiring the painting, it’s easy to imagine its subject walking through Edo’s bustling pleasure center. With just a single figure, Hishikawa has frozen this era in time.