Know about a marine reserve area created in the Ross Sea by a commission representing 24 countries
Creating a marine protected area in Antarctica's Ross Sea.
Transcript
AMELIA MOSELEY: Antarctica-- it may be the coldest, windiest, driest place on earth. SPEAKER: This is a fairly typical summer's day in the Antarctic. MOSELEY: But for heaps of cool creatures like mammals, birds, fish-- even teeny-tiny organisms-- the icy continent and its surrounding waters are home, sweet home. It's such a unique environment that while no country owns it, lots of them have agreed to protect it. In fact, every year scientists and representatives from around the globe get together in Hobart to talk about the best ways to do that. And one area they've been talking about for a long time is the Ross Sea. To find it, you have to go 4,500 k's south of Tasmania to the southern ocean, near Antarctica. It's an area about the size of Queensland. The Ross Sea is one of the most pristine environments in the world, mostly untouched by humans. That means, it's almost totally free of things like pollution and introduced species. It's home to all sorts of unique animals, including a big percentage of the world's Adelie penguins, emperor penguins, and South Pacific Weddell seals. There are also Ross Sea killer whales and it's a breeding ground for blue whales. Since 2011, the US and New Zealand have been pushing to protect the Ross Sea from potential threats like fishing, whaling, and climate change. At this year's meeting, representatives from 24 countries finally agreed to act by creating the world's biggest marine park in the Ross Sea. Something environmentalists and this unusually large penguin were very happy about. ALL: Ross Sea protected! REPRESENTATIVE 1: Today, we've seen history being made. Today is a day that kids will learn about for years to come. MOSELEY: Marine parks are similar to national parks on land, in that they have rules about what people can do in them, in order to protect the environment and native species. The Ross Sea Marine Protection Park will cover more than 1.5 million square kilometers and more than 70% will be fully protected-- that means there won't be any fishing allowed in those areas. Some fishing, for scientific reasons, will be allowed in the other parts, and scientists say that'll help them study the effects of climate change in the area. The protection will last for 35 years. While that might seem like ages, some say it should have been longer. REPRESENTATIVE 2: It's a slight concern, but I think with the amount of negotiation that's been happening over the years, this is a great first step. MOSELEY: At next year's meeting, reps will talk about creating two more marine protected areas around Antarctica to make sure this untouched wilderness stays exactly that way.