How Fred Astaire became a dancer
Astaire's first screen test earned him a negative review: “Can't act, can't sing. Balding. Can dance a little.”
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Transcript
Fred Astaire was a star of the Golden Age of Hollywood with nimble dancing shoes and elegant choreography. He is still thought of as the greatest pop music dancer of all time.Astaire was born Frederick Austerlitz in Nebraska in 1899. He started dancing professionally at age six with his sister. The family relocated to New York for more opportunities for the children’s vaudeville act, and they changed their last name to Astaire, probably after a distant French relative. He was the supporting actor, and his sister was supposed to be destined for fame. But she chose to leave the industry and marry, while Fred continued dancing. His style blended tap and ballroom dance and singing. He also played instruments, and he composed music.His first screen test earned him a negative review: “Can’t act, can’t sing. Balding. Can dance a little.” Nonetheless, he was cast in a small role by MGM in 1933.That same year he was also cast as a supporting actor in Flying Down to Rio with actress Ginger Rogers. The pair’s talent and obvious chemistry ignited both their careers and led to a string of smash hits in the ’30s.The two danced together for 16 years and appeared in many films, including The Gay Divorcee and Swing Time. Astaire’s career spanned more half a century, and he also worked with such talented actresses as Judy Garland, Rita Hayworth, and Audrey Hepburn.Astaire distinguished himself by simplifying musical dance numbers. His choreography showed the full bodies of the dancers, not just facial expressions. In his films, dance wasn’t just a special effect: his dances were important plot pieces, part of the story. The dancers weren’t just set decorations: they were expected to be actors.Astaire was also known for his even temperament and his modesty. A rumor about his will alleges that there is a clause requesting that his life story never be made into a motion picture, because he didn’t want to see his life or work misinterpreted.He died at age 88 in 1987, but his system of dance lives on in the eponymous chain of dance schools he cofounded, with locations around the world.