Religious & Spiritual Life at CMU
Religious and Spiritual Life (RSL) offers programs and initiatives that cross traditional religious boundaries in order to increase our students' knowledge of and appreciation for the full diversity of the world's religious and spiritual traditions. RSLI's mission is to support all students along the spectrum of religious and spiritual practice and exploration by:
Supporting individual religious commitment through programs, events, resources and space
Facilitating connections of individuals and communities of faith, on and off campus
Encouraging cooperation among and between religious, secular and worldview communities
Promoting spiritual exploration and wellness for the whole CMU community
Promoting religious literacy for all members of the CMU community
Connect with Religious, Spiritual, & Meaning-Making Communities
Religious & Spiritual Life Initiatives
Two Weeks of Peace
In partnership with the Center for Student Diversity and Inclusion, Wellness and Meaning-Making Programs offers a collection of events during the first two weeks of October to celebrate the quest for peace and peace-making in our campus community. See the full slate of events in the October edition of the Be Well Newsletter . Events are open to all.
The Sit Together Project
The Sit Together Project is an initiative which provides opportunities to develop interfaith leadership for members of the Carnegie Mellon community. Open to all students, the Sit Together participants build capacity in the area of worldview engagement, form relationships across lines of difference, and serve as interfaith leaders in the broader campus community. If you have questions, or are interested in participating, please email Religious and Spiritual Life Initiatives.
Spirituality Awareness Month
November is a showcase of spiritual, religious and interfaith life at Carnegie Mellon! Join Religious and Spiritual Life Initiatives, the Council of Religious Advisors, and our religious and spiritual student organizations in celebrating the religious and spiritual diversity of our community. Events are open to all.
Please see the Spirituality Awareness Calendar for 2024. For additional programming opportunities, check out the Well-being Calendar for upcoming events!
Friendsgiving
Save the Date! On Monday evening, November 17th, 2025, CMU will host Friendsgiving, the annual Thanksgiving feast at CMU that celebrates friendship, gratitude, and food. Events are open to all.
MLK Interfaith Breakfast
Every year in late January, members of the Carnegie Mellon community are invited to an informal breakfast with campus and community interfaith leaders, followed by fellowship and conversation about the life and legacy of Dr. King through the lens of faith, activism, and social justice. Open to all, please join us for breakfast, music, and conversation. Full schedule of MLK Celebration Events .
Housing Needs
Shabbat Keys are available by request for most University Housing facilities. To request a key, please email the Rev. Jennifer McCurry , coordinator for Religious and Spiritual Life, or call Housing Services at 412-268-2139 .
Housing Services does not offer any housing communities dedicated to a specific religious affiliation, is not able to provide accommodations such as single rooms or private bathrooms for religious reasons, and is unable to consider requests for roommates of similar religious beliefs.
Mental Health Benefits of Spirituality: Learning from challenges | Self-reflection | Inner peace and centeredness | Confidence and motivation | Being present in the moment | Empathy and self-compassion | Better relationships with yourself and others | Sense of community and purpose | Connecting with meaningful activities