(cid:32)
C H A P T E R
20
The Industrial
Revolution
and Its Impact
on European
Society
CHAPTER OUTLINE
• The Industrial Revolution in Great Britain
• The Spread of Industrialization
• The Social Impact of the Industrial Revolution
• Conclusion
FOCUS QUESTIONS
• What conditions and developments coalesced in Great Britain to bring
about the first Industrial Revolution?
• What were the basic features of the new industrial system created by
the Industrial Revolution?
• How did the Industrial Revolution spread from Great Britain to the
Continent and the United States, and how did industrialization in those
L
areas differ from British industrialization?
• What effects did the Industrial Revolution have on urban life, social
classes, family life, and standards of living?
• What were working conditions like in the early decades of the Industrial
Revolution, and what efforts were made to improve them?
T
HE FRENCH REVOLUTIONdramatically and quickly altered
the political structure of France, and the Napoleonic conquests
spread many of the revolutionary principles in an equally rapid and
stunning fashion to other parts of Europe. During the late eighteenth
and early nineteenth centuries, another revolution—an industrial one—
was transforming the economic and social structure of Europe, although
in a less dramatic and rapid fashion.
The period of the Industrial Revolution witnessed a quantum leap
in industrial production. New sources of energy and power, especially
coal and steam, replaced wind and water to create labor-saving
machines that dramatically decreased the use of human and animal
labor and, at the same time, increased the level of productivity. In turn,
power machinery called for new ways of organizing human labor to
maximize the benefits and profits from the new machines; factories
replaced shop and home workrooms. Many early factories were dreadful
places with difficult working conditions. Reformers, appalled at these
conditions, were especially critical of the treatment of married women.
582
One reported: “We have repeatedly seen married changes in the methods of farming and stock breeding that
females, in the last stage of pregnancy, slaving from characterized this agricultural transformation led to a sig-
morning to night beside these never-tiring machines, nificant increase in food production. British agriculture
could now feed more people at lower prices with less labor.
and when . . . they were obliged to sit down to take a
Unlike the rest of Europe, even ordinary British families
moment’s ease, and being seen by the manager, were
did not have to use most of their income to buy food, giv-
fined for the offense.” But there were also examples of
ing them the potential to purchase manufactured goods.
well-run factories. William Cobbett described one in
At the same time, a rapid growth of population in the sec-
Manchester in 1830: “In this room, which is lighted in
ond half of the eighteenth century provided a pool of sur-
the most convenient and beautiful manner, there were
plus labor for the new factories of the emerging British
five hundred pairs of looms at work, and five hundred industry. Rural workers in cottage industries also provided
persons attending those looms; and, owing to the good- a potential labor force for industrial enterprises.
ness of the masters, the whole looking healthy and Britain had a ready supply of capital for investment
well-dressed.” in the new industrial machines and the factories that were
During the Industrial Revolution, Europe experi- needed to house them. In addition to profits from trade
enced a shift from a traditional, labor-intensive econ- and cottage industry, Britain possessed an effective cen-
tral bank and well-developed, flexible credit facilities.
omy based on farming and handicrafts to a more
Nowhere in Europe were people so accustomed to using
capital-intensive economy based on manufacturing by
paper instruments to facilitate capital transactions. Many
machines, specialized labor, and industrial factories.
early factory owners were merchants and entrepreneurs
Although the Industrial Revolution took decades to
who had profited from eighteenth-century cottage indus-
spread, it was truly revolutionary in the way it funda-
try. Of 110 cotton spinning mills in operation in the area
mentally changed Europeans, their society, and their
known as the Midlands between 1769 and 1800, 62 were
relationship to other peoples. The development of large established by hosiers, drapers, mercers, and others
factories encouraged mass movements of people from involved in some fashion in the cottage textile industry.
the countryside to urban areas where impersonal coex- But capital alone is only part of the story. Britain had a fair
istence replaced the traditional intimacy of rural life. number of individuals who were interested in making prof-
Higher levels of productivity led to a search for new its if the opportunity presented itself (see the box on p.
sources of raw materials, new consumption patterns, 585). The British were a people, as one historian has said,
“fascinated by wealth and commerce, collectively and indi-
and a revolution in transportation that allowed raw
vidually.” These early industrial entrepreneurs faced con-
materials and finished products to be moved quickly
siderable financial hazards, however. Fortunes were made
around the world. The creation of a wealthy industrial
quickly and lost just as quickly. The structure of early firms
middle class and a huge industrial working class (or
was open and fluid. An individual or family proprietorship
proletariat) substantially transformed traditional social
was the usual mode of operation, but entrepreneurs also
relationships.
brought in friends to help them. They just as easily jetti-
soned them. John Marshall, who made money in flax spin-
ning, threw out his partners: “As they could neither of
them be of any further use, I released them from the firm
u The Industrial Revolution in and took the whole upon myself.”1
Britain was richly supplied with important mineral
Great Britain
resources, such as coal and iron ore, needed in the man-
ufacturing process. Britain was also a small country, and
Although the Industrial Revolution evolved out of ante- the relatively short distances made transportation read-
cedents that occurred over a long period of time, histori- ily accessible. In addition to nature’s provision of abun-
ans generally agree that it had its beginnings in Britain dant rivers, from the mid-seventeenth century onward,
in the second half of the eighteenth century. By 1850, the both private and public investment poured into the con-
Industrial Revolution had made Great Britain the wealth- struction of new roads, bridges, and, beginning in the
iest country in the world; by that time it had also spread 1750s and 1760s, canals. By 1780, roads, rivers, and
to the European continent and the New World. By the end canals linked the major industrial centers of the North, the
of the nineteenth century, both Germany and the United Midlands, London, and the Atlantic. Unlike the conti-
States would surpass Britain in industrial production. nental countries, Britain had no internal customs barri-
ers to hinder domestic trade.
l Origins Britain’s government also played a significant role
in the process of industrialization. Parliament contributed
A number of factors or conditions coalesced in Britain to to the favorable business climate by providing a stable
produce the first Industrial Revolution. One of these was government and passing laws that protected private prop-
the agricultural revolution of the eighteenth century. The erty. Moreover, Britain was remarkable for the freedom
The Industrial Revolution and Its Impact on European Society 583
produced textiles fulfilled that demand. Nor should we
0 50 100 150 Kilometers
overlook the British domestic market. Britain had the high-
0 50 100 Miles est standard of living in Europe and a rapidly growing pop-
ulation. As Daniel Defoe noted already in 1728:
Glasgow North For the rest, we see their Houses and Lodgings tolerably
furnished, at least stuff’d well with useful and necessary
Sea
household Goods: Even those we call poor People, Journey-
SCOTLAND
men, working and Pains-staking People do thus; they lye
warm, live in Plenty, work hard, and [need] know no Want.
These are the People that carry off the Gross of your Con-
sumption; ’tis for these your Markets are kept open late on
Saturday nights; because they usually receive their Week’s
Wages late . . . in a Word, these are the Life of our whole
Bradford Commerce, and all by their Multitude: Their Numbers are
Leeds
Cotton and woolen textiles not Hundreds or Thousands, or Hundreds of Thousands,
Machinery
but Millions; . . . by their Wages they are able to live plenti-
Iron
Liverpool Sheffield fully, and it is by their expensive, generous, free way of
living, that the Home Consumption is rais’d to such a Bulk,
Iron as well of our own, as of foreign Production.2
Manchester
Hardware
This demand from both domestic and foreign markets and
Birmingham
the inability of the old system to fulfill it led entrepreneurs
Iron
Machinery to seek and adopt the new methods of manufacturing that
Iron Pottery
a series of inventions provided. In so doing, these indi-
London viduals produced the Industrial Revolution.
Bristol
Machinery
Consumer goods l Technological Changes and New Forms
Tin and of Industrial Organization
copper mining
In the 1770s and 1780s, the cotton textile industry took
Cities with over 100,000 the first major step toward the Industrial Revolution with
people are labeled.
the creation of the modern factory.
Towns with over 20,000
people are shown:
50,000 / THE COTTON INDUSTRY
Exposed coalfields
Already in the eighteenth century, Great Britain had
400,000
Industrial areas
surged ahead in the production of cheap cotton goods
Principal railroads 2,400,000 using the traditional methods of cottage industry. The
development of the flying shuttle had sped the process of
weaving on a loom and enabled weavers to double their
MAP 20.1 Britain in the Industrial Revolution.
output. This created shortages of yarn, however, until
James Hargreaves’s spinning jenny, perfected by 1768,
it provided for private enterprise. It placed fewer restric- enabled spinners to produce yarn in greater quantities.
tions on private entrepreneurs than any other European Richard Arkwright’s water frame spinning machine, pow-
state. ered by water or horse, and Samuel Crompton’s so-called
Finally, a supply of markets gave British industrial- mule, which combined aspects of the water frame and
ists a ready outlet for their manufactured goods. British spinning jenny, increased yarn production even more.
exports quadrupled from 1660 to 1760. In the course of its Edmund Cartwright’s power loom, invented in 1787,
eighteenth-century wars and conquests, Great Britain had allowed the weaving of cloth to catch up with the spin-
developed a vast colonial empire at the expense of its lead- ning of yarn. Even then, early power looms were grossly
ing continental rivals, the Dutch Republic and France. inefficient, enabling cottage, hand-loom weavers to con-
Britain also possessed a well-developed merchant marine tinue to prosper, at least until the mid-1820s. After that
that was able to transport goods to any place in the world. they were gradually replaced by the new machines. In
A crucial factor in Britain’s successful industrialization 1813, there were 2,400 power looms in operation in Great
was the ability to produce cheaply those articles most in Britain; they numbered 14,150 in 1820, 100,000 in 1833,
demand abroad. And the best markets abroad were not in and 250,000 by 1850. In the 1820s, there were still
Europe, where countries protected their own incipient 250,000 hand-loom weavers in Britain; by 1860, only
industries, but in the Americas, Africa, and the East, where 3,000 were left.
people wanted sturdy, inexpensive clothes rather than The water frame, Crompton’s mule, and power looms
costly, highly finished, luxury items. Britain’s machine- presented new opportunities to entrepreneurs. It was
584 CHAPTER 20
L
The Traits of the British Industrial Entrepreneur
Richard Arkwright (1732–1792), inventor of a spinning and injured his circumstances. His natural disposition
frame and founder of cotton factories, was a good example was ardent, enterprising, and stubbornly persevering: his
of the successful entrepreneur in the early Industrial Revo- mind was as coarse as it was bold and active, and his
lution in Britain. In this selection, Edward Baines, who manners were rough and unpleasing. . . .
wrote The History of the Cotton Manufacture in Great The most marked traits in the character of Arkwright
Britainin 1835, discusses the traits that explain the were his wonderful ardor, energy, and perseverance. He
success of Arkwright and presumably other British commonly laboured in his multifarious concerns from
entrepreneurs. five o’clock in the morning till nine at night; and when
considerably more than fifty years of age,—feeling that
l the defects of his education placed him under great
Edward Baines, The History of the Cotton
difficulty and inconvenience in conducting his corre-
Manufacture in Great Britain
spondence, and in the general management of his busi-
Richard Arkwright rose by the force of his natural talents ness,—he encroached upon his sleep, in order to gain
from a very humble condition in society. He was born at an hour each day to learn English grammar, and another
Preston on the 23rd of December, 1732, of poor parents: hour to improve his writing and orthography [spelling]!
being the youngest of thirteen children, his parents He was impatient of whatever interfered with his favorite
could only afford to give him an education of the hum- pursuits; and the fact is too strikingly characteristic not
blest kind, and he was scarcely able to write. He was to be mentioned, that he separated from his wife not
brought up to the trade of a barber at Kirkham and Pres- many years after their marriage, because she, convinced
ton, and established himself in that business at Bolton that he would starve his family [because of the impracti-
in the year 1760. Having become possessed of a chemi- cal nature of his schemes], broke some of his experi-
cal process for dyeing human hair, which in that day mental models of machinery. Arkwright was a severe
(when wigs were universal) was of considerable value, economist of time; and, that he might not waste a
he traveled about collecting hair, and again disposing of moment, he generally traveled with four horses, and
it when dyed. In 1761, he married a wife from Leigh, at a very rapid speed. His concerns in Derbyshire, Lan-
and the connections he thus formed in that town are cashire, and Scotland were so extensive and numerous,
supposed to have afterwards brought him acquainted as to [show] at once his astonishing power of transact-
with Highs’s experiments in making spinning machines. ing business and his all grasping spirit. In many of these
He himself manifested a strong bent for experiments in he had partners, but he generally managed in such a
mathematics, which he is stated to have followed with way, that, whoever lost, he himself was a gainer.
so much devotedness as to have neglected his business
much more efficient to bring workers to the machines and industries. The steam engine secured the triumph of the
organize their labor collectively in factories located next Industrial Revolution.
to rivers and streams, the sources of power for many of As in much of the Industrial Revolution, one kind of
these early machines, than to leave the workers dispersed change forced other changes. In many ways the steam
in their cottages. The concentration of labor in the new engine was the result of the need for more efficient pumps
factories also brought the laborers and their families to to eliminate water seepage from deep mines. Deep coal
live in the new towns that rapidly grew up around the mines were in turn the result of Britain’s need and desire
factories. to find new sources of energy to replace wood. By the early
The early devices used to speed up the processes eighteenth century, the British were acutely aware of a
of spinning and weaving were the products of weavers and growing shortage of timber, which was used in heating,
spinners, in effect, of artisan tinkerers. But the subsequent to build homes and ships, and in enormous quantities to
expansion of the cotton industry and the ongoing demand produce the charcoal utilized in smelting iron ore to make
for even more cotton goods created additional pressure for pig iron. At the beginning of the eighteenth century, the
new and more complicated technology. The invention that discovery of new processes for smelting iron ore with coal
pushed the cotton industry to even greater heights of pro- and coke (see the next section) led to deeper and deeper
ductivity was the steam engine. mines for more intensive mining of coal. But as mines were
dug below the water table, they filled with water. An early
/ THE STEAM ENGINE solution to the problem was the use of mechanical pumps
The invention of the steam engine played a major role in powered by horses walking in circles. In one coal mine
the Industrial Revolution. It revolutionized the production in Warwickshire, for example, 500 horses were used to lift
of cotton goods and caused the factory system to spread the water from the mine, bucket by bucket. The need for
to other areas of production, thereby creating whole new more efficient pumps led Thomas Newcomen to develop
The Industrial Revolution and Its Impact on European Society 585
a steam pump or, as it was called, an “atmospheric engine” much of it from the American South where it was grown
that was first used in 1712. Though better than horses, it by plantation owners using slave labor. By this time, cot-
was still inefficient. ton cloth was Britain’s most important product by value
In the 1760s, a Scottish engineer, James Watt and was produced mainly in factories, although some
(1736–1819), was asked to repair a Newcomen engine. hand-loom weavers still worked in their cottages. The price
Instead he added a separate condenser and steam pump of yarn was but one-twentieth of what it had been. The
and transformed Newcomen’s machine into a genuine cheapest labor in India could not compete in quality or
steam engine. Power was derived not from air pressure quantity with Britain. British cotton goods sold everywhere
as in Newcomen’s atmospheric engine, but from steam in the world. And in Britain itself, cheap cotton cloth made
itself. Much more efficient than a Newcomen engine, it possible for millions of poor people to wear undergar-
Watt’s engine could pump water three times as quickly. ments, long a preserve of the rich who alone could afford
Initially, it possessed one major liability, however; as a underwear made with expensive linen cloth. New work
contemporary noted in 1778: “the vast consumption of clothing that was tough, comfortable to the skin, and yet
fuel in these engines is an immense drawback on the profit cheap and easily washable became common. Even the
of our mines, for every fire-engine of magnitude consumes rich liked the colorful patterns of cotton prints and their
£3000 worth of coals per annum. This heavy tax amounts light weight for summer use.
almost to a prohibition.”3 As steam engines were made The steam engine proved invaluable to Britain’s
more efficient, however, they also became cheaper to use. Industrial Revolution. In 1800, engines were generating
In 1782, James Watt enlarged the possibilities of the 10,000 horsepower; by 1850, 500,000 horsepower were
steam engine when he developed a rotary engine that being generated by stationary engines and 790,000 by
could turn a shaft and thus drive machinery. Steam power mobile engines, the last largely in locomotives (see the
could now be applied to spinning and weaving cotton, and next section). Unlike horses, the steam engine was a tire-
before long cotton mills using steam engines were multi- less source of power and depended for fuel on a sub-
plying across Britain. By 1850, seven-eighths of the power stance—namely, coal—that seemed then to be unlimited
available to the entire British cotton industry came from in quantity. The popular saying that “Steam is an English-
steam. Since steam engines were fired by coal, they did not man” had real significance by 1850. The steam engine also
need to be located near rivers; entrepreneurs now had replaced waterpower in such places as flour and sugar
greater flexibility in their choice of location. mills. Just as the need for more coal had helped lead to the
The new boost given to cotton textile production by steam engine, so the success of the steam engine increased
technological changes became readily apparent. In 1760, the demand for coal and led to an expansion in coal pro-
Britain had imported 2.5 million pounds of raw cotton, duction; between 1815 and 1850, the output of coal
which was farmed out to cottage industries. All work was quadrupled. In turn, new processes using coal furthered
done by hand either in workers’ homes or in the small the development of an iron industry.
shops of master weavers. In 1787, the British imported
22 million pounds of cotton; most of it was spun on / THE IRON INDUSTRY
machines, some powered by water in large mills. By 1840, The British iron industry was radically transformed during
366 million pounds of cotton were imported annually, the Industrial Revolution. Britain had large resources of
A BOULTON AND WATT STEAM ENGINE.
Encouraged by his business partner, Matthew
Boulton, James Watt developed the first gen-
uine steam engine. Pictured here is a typical
Boulton and Watt engine. Steam pressure
in the cylinder on the left drives the beam
upward and sets the flywheel in motion.
586 CHAPTER 20
RAILROAD LINE FROM LIVERPOOL TO MANCHESTER. The this illustration, carrying passengers was the railroad’s
railroad line from Liverpool to Manchester, first opened main business. First-class passengers rode in covered
in 1830, relied on steam locomotives. As is evident in cars; second- and third-class passengers in open cars.
iron ore, but at the beginning of the eighteenth century, the were pushed along parallel wooden rails. The rails reduced
basic process of producing iron had altered little since the friction, enabling horses to haul more substantial loads.
Middle Ages and still depended heavily on charcoal. In By 1700, some entrepreneurs began to replace wooden
the early eighteenth century, new methods of smelting iron rails with cast-iron rails, and by the early nineteenth cen-
ore to produce cast iron were devised based on the use tury, railways—still dependent on horsepower—were com-
of coke derived from coal. Still, a better quality of iron was mon in British mining and industrial districts. The
not possible until the 1780s when Henry Cort developed development of the steam engine led to a radical trans-
a system called puddling, in which coke was used to burn formation of the railways.
away impurities in pig iron to produce an iron of high qual- In 1804, Richard Trevithick pioneered the first steam-
ity. A boom then ensued in the British iron industry. In powered locomotive on an industrial rail-line in south
1740, Britain produced 17,000 tons of iron; in the 1780s, Wales. It pulled ten tons of ore and seventy people at five
almost 70,000 tons; by the 1840s, over two million tons; miles per hour. Better locomotives soon followed. The
and by 1852, almost three million tons, more than the rest engines built by George Stephenson and his son proved
of the world combined. superior, and it was in their workshops in Newcastle upon
The development of the iron industry was in many Tyne that the locomotives for the first modern railways in
ways a response to the demand for the new machines. Britain were built. George Stephenson’s Rocket was used
The high-quality wrought iron produced by the Cort on the first public railway line, which opened in 1830,
process made it the most widely used metal until the pro- extending thirty-two miles from Liverpool to Manchester.
duction of cheaper steel in the 1860s. The growing supply Rocket sped along at sixteen miles per hour. Within twenty
of less costly metal encouraged the use of machinery years, locomotives had reached fifty miles per hour, an
in other industries, most noticeably in new means of incredible speed to contemporary passengers. During the
transportation. same period, new companies were formed to build addi-
tional railroads as the infant industry proved to be not only
/ A REVOLUTION IN TRANSPORTATION technically but financially successful. In 1840, Britain had
The eighteenth century had witnessed an expansion of almost 2,000 miles of railroads; by 1850, 6,000 miles of rail-
transportation facilities in Britain as entrepreneurs real- road track crisscrossed much of the country.
ized the need for more efficient means of moving resources The railroad contributed significantly to the success
and goods. Turnpike trusts constructed new roads, and and maturing of the Industrial Revolution. The railroad’s
between 1760 and 1830 a network of canals was built. But demands for coal and iron furthered the growth of those
both roads and canals were soon overtaken by a new form industries. British supremacy in civil and mechanical engi-
of transportation that dazzled people with its promise. neering, so evident after 1840, was in large part based
To many economic historians, railroads were the “most upon the skills acquired in railway building. The huge cap-
important single factor in promoting European economic ital demands necessary for railway construction encour-
progress in the 1830s and 1840s.” Again, Britain was the aged a whole new group of middle-class investors to invest
leader in the revolution. their money in joint-stock companies (see Limitations to
The beginnings of railways can be found in mining Industrialization later in this chapter). Railway construc-
operations in Germany as early as 1500 and in British coal tion created new job opportunities, especially for farm
mines after 1600 where small handcarts filled with coal laborers and peasants who had long been accustomed to
The Industrial Revolution and Its Impact on European Society 587
OPENING OF THE ROYAL ALBERT
BRIDGE. This painting by Thomas
Roberts shows the ceremonies
attending the official opening of
the Royal Albert Bridge. I. K.
Brunel, one of Britain’s great
engineers, designed this bridge,
which carried a railroad line
across the Tamar River into
Cornwall. As is evident in the
picture, the bridge was high
enough to allow ships to pass
underneath.
finding work outside their local villages. Perhaps most Preindustrial workers were not accustomed to a
importantly, a cheaper and faster means of transportation “timed” format. Agricultural laborers had always kept irreg-
had a rippling effect on the growth of an industrial econ- ular hours; hectic work at harvest time might be followed
omy. By reducing the price of goods, larger markets were by periods of inactivity. Even in the burgeoning cottage
created; increased sales necessitated more factories and industry of the eighteenth century, weavers and spinners
more machinery, thereby reinforcing the self-sustaining who worked at home might fulfill their weekly quotas by
nature of the Industrial Revolution, which marked a fun- working around the clock for two or three days, followed
damental break with the traditional European economy. by a leisurely pace until the next week’s demands forced
The great productivity of the Industrial Revolution enabled another work spurt.
entrepreneurs to reinvest their profits in new capital equip- Factory owners, therefore, faced a formidable task.
ment, further expanding the productive capacity of the They had to create a system of time-work discipline that
economy. Continuous, even rapid, self-sustaining eco- would accustom employees to working regular, unvarying
nomic growth came to be seen as a fundamental charac- hours during which they performed a set number of tasks
teristic of the new industrial economy. over and over again as efficiently as possible. One early
The railroad was the perfect symbol of this aspect industrialist said that his aim was “to make such machines
of the Industrial Revolution. The ability to transport goods of the men as cannot err.” Such work, of course, tended to
and people at dramatic speeds also provided visible con- be repetitive and boring, and factory owners resorted to
firmation of a new sense of power. When railway engi- tough methods to accomplish their goals. Factory regula-
neers pierced mountains with tunnels and spanned tions were minute and detailed (see the box on p. 589).
chasms with breathtaking bridges, contemporaries expe- Adult workers were fined for a wide variety of minor in-
rienced a sense of power over nature not felt before in fractions, such as being a few minutes late for work, and
Western civilization. dismissed for more serious misdoings, especially drunk-
enness. The latter was viewed as particularly offensive
/ THE INDUSTRIAL FACTORY because it set a bad example for younger workers and also
Initially the product of the new cotton industry, the factory courted disaster in the midst of dangerous machinery.
became the chief means of organizing labor for the new Employers found that dismissals and fines worked well for
machines. As the workplace shifted from the artisan’s shop adult employees; in a time when great population growth
and the peasant’s cottage to the factory, the latter was had produced large numbers of unskilled workers, dis-
not viewed as just a larger work unit. Employers hired missal could be disastrous. Children were less likely to
workers who no longer owned the means of production but understand the implications of dismissal so they were
were simply paid wages to run the machines. sometimes disciplined more directly—frequently by
From its beginning, the factory system demanded a beating.
new type of discipline from its employees. Factory owners The efforts of factory owners in the early Industrial
could not afford to let their expensive machinery stand Revolution to impose a new set of values were frequently
idle. Workers were forced to work regular hours and in reinforced by the new evangelical churches. Methodism,
shifts to keep the machines producing at a steady pace for in particular, emphasized that people reborn in Jesus must
maximum output. This represented a massive adjustment forgo immoderation and follow a disciplined path. Lazi-
for early factory laborers. ness and wasteful habits were sinful. The acceptance of
588 CHAPTER 20
L
Discipline in the New Factories
Workers in the new factories of the Industrial Revolution 4. Repeated irregular arrival at work shall lead to
had been accustomed to a lifestyle free of overseers. Unlike dismissal. This shall also apply to those who are
the cottages, where workers spun thread and wove cloth in found idling by an official or overseer, and refused
their own rhythm and time, the factories demanded a new, to obey their order to resume work. . . .
rigorous discipline geared to the requirements of the 6. No worker may leave his place of work otherwise
machines. This selection is taken from a set of rules for a than for reasons connected with his work.
factory in Berlin in 1844. They were typical of company 7. All conversation with fellow-workers is prohibited;
rules everywhere the factory system had been established. if any worker requires information about his work,
he must turn to the overseer, or to the particular
l fellow-worker designated for the purpose.
The Foundry and Engineering Works of
8. Smoking in the workshops or in the yard is prohib-
the Royal Overseas Trading Company,
ited during working hours; anyone caught smoking
Factory Rules
shall be fined five silver groschen for the sick fund
In every large works, and in the co-ordination of any for every such offense. . . .
large number of workmen, good order and harmony 10. Natural functions must be performed at the appro-
must be looked upon as the fundamentals of success, priate places, and whoever is found soiling walls,
and therefore the following rules shall be strictly fences, squares, etc., and similarly, whoever is
observed. found washing his face and hands in the workshop
and not in the places assigned for the purpose,
1. The normal working day begins at all seasons at
shall be fined five silver groschen for the sick
6 A.M. precisely and ends, after the usual break of
fund....
half an hour for breakfast, an hour for dinner and
12. It goes without saying that all overseers and offi-
half an hour for tea, at 7 P.M.,and it shall be
cials of the firm shall be obeyed without question,
strictly observed. . . .
and shall be treated with due deference. Disobedi-
Workers arriving 2 minutes late shall lose half
ence will be punished by dismissal.
an hour’s wages; whoever is more than 2 minutes
13. Immediate dismissal shall also be the fate of any-
late may not start work until after the next break;
one found drunk in any of the workshops. . . .
or at least shall lose his wages until then. Any dis-
14. Every workman is obliged to report to his superiors
putes about the correct time shall be settled by the
any acts of dishonesty or embezzlement on the
clock mounted above the gatekeeper’s lodge....
part of his fellow workmen. If he omits to do so,
3. No workman, whether employed by time or piece,
and it is shown after subsequent discovery of a
may leave before the end of the working day, with-
misdemeanor that he knew about it at the time, he
out having first received permission from the over-
shall be liable to be taken to court as an accessory
seer and having given his name to the gatekeeper.
after the fact and the wage due to him shall be
Omission of these two actions shall lead to a fine
retained as punishment.
of ten silver groschen [pennies] payable to the sick
fund.
hardship in this life paved the way for the joys of the next. tal Palace, an enormous structure made entirely of glass
Evangelical values paralleled the efforts of the new factory and iron, a tribute to British engineering skills. Cover-
owners to instill laborers with their own middle-class val- ing nineteen acres, the Crystal Palace contained 100,000
ues of hard work, discipline, and thrift. In one crucial exhibits that showed the wide variety of products created
sense, the early industrialists proved successful. As the by the Industrial Revolution. Six million people visited
nineteenth century progressed, the second and third gen- the fair in six months. Though most of them were Britons,
erations of workers came to view a regular working week who had traveled to London by train, foreign visitors were
as a natural way of life. It was, of course, an attitude that also prominent. The Great Exhibition displayed Britain’s
made possible Britain’s incredible economic growth in that wealth to the world; it was a gigantic symbol of British
century. success. Even trees were brought inside the Crystal
Palace as a visible symbol of how the Industrial Revo-
l The Great Exhibition: Britain in 1851 lution had achieved human domination over nature.
Prince Albert, Queen Victoria’s husband, expressed the
In 1851, the British organized the world’s first industrial sentiments of the age when he described the exhibition
fair. It was housed at Kensington in London in the Crys- as a sign that “man is approaching a more complete
The Industrial Revolution and Its Impact on European Society 589
INSIDE AN EARLY COTTON FACTORY. The devel-
opment of the factory changed the relationship
between workers and employers as workers were
encouraged to adjust to a new system of discipline
that forced them to work regular hours and in
shifts. This engraving depicts the interior of an
early textile factory.
fulfillment of that great and sacred mission which he has their cottage industries, and witnessed growth in foreign
to perform in this world . . . to conquer nature to his use.” trade. But whereas Britain’s economy began to move in
Not content with that, he also linked British success to new industrial directions in the 1770s and 1780s, conti-
divine will: “In promoting [the progress of the human nental countries lagged behind because they did not share
race], we are accomplishing the will of the great and some of the advantages that had made Britain’s Industrial
blessed God.”4 Revolution possible. Lack of good roads and problems
By the year of the Great Exhibition, Great Britain with river transit made transportation difficult. Toll stations
had become the world’s first and richest industrial nation. on important rivers and customs barriers along state
Britain was the “workshop, banker, and trader of the boundaries increased the costs and prices of goods. Guild
world.” It produced one-half of the world’s coal and man- restrictions were also more prevalent, creating restrictions
ufactured goods; its cotton industry alone in 1851 was that pioneer industrialists in Britain did not have to face.
equal in size to the industries of all other European coun- Finally, continental entrepreneurs were generally less
tries combined. The quantity of goods produced was grow- enterprising than their British counterparts and tended
ing at three times the growth rate in 1780. No doubt, to adhere to traditional business attitudes, such as a dis-
Britain’s certainty about its mission in the world in the like of competition, a high regard for family security cou-
nineteenth century was grounded in its incredible mate- pled with an unwillingness to take risks in investment, and
rial success story. an excessive worship of thriftiness.
One additional factor also affected most of the Con-
tinent between 1790 and 1812: the upheavals associ-
u The Spread of Industrialization ated with the wars of the French revolutionary and
Napoleonic eras. Disruption of regular communications
between Britain and the Continent made it difficult for
Beginning first in Great Britain, industrialization spread to
continental countries to keep up with the new British
the continental countries of Europe and the United States
technology. Moreover, the wars wreaked havoc with
at different times and speeds during the nineteenth cen-
trade, caused much physical destruction and loss of man-
tury. First to be industrialized on the Continent were Bel-
power, weakened currencies, and led to political and
gium, France, and the German states and in North
social instability. Napoleon’s Continental System helped
America, the new nation of the United States. Not until
to ruin a number of hitherto prosperous ports. The elim-
after 1850 did the Industrial Revolution spread to the rest
ination of European markets for British textiles did
of Europe and other parts of the world.
temporarily revive the woolen industry in France and Bel-
gium and stimulated textile manufacturing along the
l Limitations to Industrialization Rhine and in Silesia. After 1815, however, when cheap
British goods again flooded European markets, the Euro-
In 1815, Belgium, France, and the German states were still pean textile industry suffered.
largely agrarian. During the eighteenth century, some of In the long run, the revolutionary and Napoleonic
the continental countries had experienced developments wars created an additional obstacle to rapid industrial-
similar to those of Britain. They, too, had achieved popu- ization by widening the gap between British and conti-
lation growth, made agricultural improvements, expanded nental industrial machinery. By 1815, after Napoleon had
590 CHAPTER 20
THE CRYSTAL PALACE. The Great
Exhibition, organized in 1851, was a
symbol of the success of Great Britain,
which had become the world’s first and
richest industrial nation. Over 100,000
exhibits were housed in the Crystal
Palace, a giant structure of cast iron
and glass. This illustration shows the
front of the palace and some of its
numerous visitors.
finally been defeated and normal communication between could scarcely wait for Germans to be trained “so that the
Britain and the Continent had been restored, British indus- Englishmen could all be whipped out: we must even now
trial equipment had grown larger and become more expen- tread softly with them, for they’re only too quick to speak
sive. As a result, self-financed family enterprises were of quitting if one does so little as not look at them in a
either unable or unwilling to raise the amount of capital friendly fashion.”5
necessary to modernize by investing in the latest equip- Gradually, the Continent achieved technological
ment. Instead, most entrepreneurs in France, Belgium, and independence as local people learned all the skills their
Germany initially chose to invest in used machines and British teachers had to offer. By the 1840s, a new genera-
less productive mills. Consequently, industrialization on tion of skilled mechanics from Belgium and France was
the Continent faced numerous hurdles, and as it pro- spreading their knowledge east and south, playing the
ceeded in earnest after 1815, it did so along lines that were same role that the British had earlier. More importantly,
somewhat different from Britain’s. however, continental countries, especially France and the
Lack of technical knowledge was initially a major German states, began to establish a wide range of tech-
obstacle to industrialization. But the continental coun- nical schools to train engineers and mechanics.
tries possessed an advantage here; they could simply bor- That government played an important role in this
row British techniques and practices. Of course, the regard brings us to a second difference between British and
British tried to prevent that. Until 1825, British artisans continental industrialization. Governments in most of the
were prohibited from leaving the country; until 1842, the continental countries were accustomed to playing a sig-
export of important machinery and machine parts, espe- nificant role in economic affairs. Furthering the develop-
cially for textile production, was forbidden. Nevertheless, ment of industrialization was a logical extension of that
the British were not able to control this situation by leg- attitude. Hence, governments provided for the costs of
islation. Already by 1825, there were at least 2,000 skilled technical education; awarded grants to inventors and for-
British mechanics on the Continent, and British equip- eign entrepreneurs; exempted foreign industrial equipment
ment was also being sold abroad, whether legally or from import duties; and, in some places, even financed fac-
illegally. tories. Of equal, if not greater importance in the long run,
Although many Britons who went abroad to sell their governments actively bore much of the cost of building
skills were simply skilled mechanics, a number of them roads and canals, deepening and widening river channels,
were accomplished entrepreneurs who had managerial as and constructing railroads. By 1850, a network of iron rails
well as technical skills. John Cockerill, for example, was had spread across Europe, although only Germany and
an aggressive businessman who established a highly prof- Belgium had completed major parts of their systems by
itable industrial plant at Seraing near Liège in southern that time. Although European markets did not feel the real
Belgium in 1817. Encouraged by the Belgian government, impact of the railroad until after 1850, railroad construc-
Cockerill thought nothing of pirating the innovations of tion itself in the 1830s and 1840s gave great impetus to the
other British industrialists to further his own factories. metalworking and engineering industries.
Aware of their importance, British technicians abroad were Governments on the Continent also used tariffs to
often contentious and arrogant, arousing the anger of con- further industrialization. After 1815, cheap British goods
tinental industrialists. Fritz Harkort, who initiated the engi- flooded continental markets. The French responded with
neering industry in Germany, once exclaimed that he high tariffs to protect their fledgling industries. The most
The Industrial Revolution and Its Impact on European Society 591
0 250 500 750 Kilometers
FINLAND
0 250 500 Miles NORWAY
Oslo St. Petersburg
Stockholm
a LIVONIA
North e
SWEDEN S
c COURLAND
Sea alti
Glasgow Edinburgh DENMARK Copenhagen B
GREAT Niem
a
BRITAIN n
M Li a v n e c r B h p r e o a s o d t l e fo r rd
Birm
L S
i
e h
n
e e
g
d f
h
f s
a
ie
m
ld NETHERLANDS Hambu
B
rg
erlin
PRU V S is S tu I la A
R.
R. RUSSIA
London POLAND Warsaw
Bristol Amsterdam Cologne Breslau
Brussels SAXONY
GERMANY Prague G
A
L
Atlantic
Paris BOHEMIA
Vienna
IC
IA
Ocean
Loire
R.
SWITZERLAND
Munich Budapest
FRANCE AUSTRIA-HUNGARY
Bordeaux Turin Po
Mil
G
an
enoa R.
Venice Danube
R.
Marseilles Florence SERBIA
Ebro ITALY
OTTOMAN EMPIRE
R. Rome
PORTUGAL
Mediterranean Sea
SPAIN
Manufacturing and industrial areas Coal mining
Major cities:
No peasant emancipation before 1848 Iron industry
1820
Railways by 1850 Textile industries
1850
Banks Silk industries
MAP 20.2 The Industrialization of Europe by 1850.
systematic exposition for the use of tariffs, however, was mostly merchant or private banks, but in the 1830s two
made by a German writer, Friedrich List (1789–1846), who Belgian banks, the Société Générale and the Banque de
emigrated to America and returned to Germany as a Belgique, took a new approach. By accepting savings from
United States consul. In his National System of Political many depositors, they developed large capital resources
Economy, written in 1844, List advocated a rapid and that they invested on a large scale in railroads, mining, and
large-scale program of industrialization as the surest path heavy industry. These investments were especially impor-
to develop a nation’s strength. To assure that path to tant to the Belgian coal industry, which became the largest
industrialization, he felt that a nation must use protec- on the Continent in the 1840s. Shareholders in these joint-
tive tariffs. If countries followed the British policy of free stock corporations had limited liability; they could only be
trade, then cheaper British goods would inundate national held responsible for the amount of their investment.
markets and destroy infant industries before they had a Similar institutions emerged in France and German-
chance to grow. Germany, he insisted, could not compete speaking lands as well in the 1850s with the establishment
with Britain without protective tariffs. of the Crédit Mobilier in France, the Darmstadt Bank in
A third significant difference between British and Germany, and the Kreditanstalt in Austria. They, too, took
continental industrialization was the role of the joint-stock in savings of small investors and bought shares in the
investment bank on the Continent. Such banks mobilized new industries. The French consul in Leipzig noted their
the savings of thousands of small and large investors, cre- significance: “Every town and state [in Germany],” he
ating a supply of capital that could then be plowed back pointed out, “however small it may be, wants its bank and
into industry. Previously, continental banks had been its Crédit Mobilier.” These investments proved invaluable
592 CHAPTER 20
THE SPREAD OF INDUSTRIALIZATION: FRENCH IRONWORKS. the Manufacture Nationale, a small French ironworks
Industrialization on the Continent lagged considerably in Paris. Industrialization in France was a slow process
behind that of Great Britain. This 1800 engraving shows until the mid-nineteenth century.
to continental industrialization. By starting with less lesser degree, Belgium were dispersed through many
expensive machines, the British had been able to indus- regions. Noticeable, too, was the mixture of old and new.
trialize largely through the private capital of successful The old techniques of the cottage system, such as the use
individuals who reinvested their profits. On the Continent of hand looms, held on much longer. In the French district
advanced industrial machines necessitated large amounts of Normandy, for example, in 1849 eighty-three mills were
of capital; joint-stock industrial banks provided it. still driven by hand or animal power.
As traditional methods persisted alongside the new
l Centers of Continental Industrialization methods in cotton manufacturing, the new steam engine
came to be used primarily in mining and metallurgy on the
The Industrial Revolution on the Continent occurred in Continent rather than in textile manufacturing. At first,
three major centers between 1815 and 1850—Belgium, almost all of the steam engines on the Continent came
France, and the German states. Here, too, cotton played from Britain; not until the 1820s was a domestic machine
an important role, although it was not as significant as industry developed.
heavy industry. France was the continental leader in the In Britain, the Industrial Revolution had been built
manufacture of cotton goods but still lagged far behind upon the cotton industry; on the Continent, the iron and
Great Britain. In 1849, France used 64,000 tons of raw coal of heavy industry led the way. As in textiles, however,
cotton, Belgium, 11,000, and Germany, 20,000, whereas heavy industry on the Continent before 1850 was a mix-
Britain utilized 286,000 tons. Continental cotton facto- ture of old and new. The adoption of new techniques, such
ries were older, used less efficient machines, and had less as coke-smelted iron and puddling furnaces, coincided
productive labor. In general, continental technology in with the expansion of old-type charcoal blast furnaces.
the cotton industry was a generation behind Great Before 1850, Germany lagged significantly behind both
Britain. But that is not the whole story. With its cheap Belgium and France in heavy industry, and most German
coal and scarce water, Belgium gravitated toward the use iron manufacturing remained based on old techniques.
of the steam engine as the major source of power and Not until the 1840s was coke-blast iron produced in the
invested in the new machines. By the mid-1840s, Bel- Rhineland. At that time, no one had yet realized the trea-
gium had the most modern cotton-manufacturing system sure of coal buried in the Ruhr valley. A German official
on the Continent. wrote in 1852 that “it is clearly not to be expected that Ger-
The development of cotton manufacturing on the many will ever be able to reach the level of production of
Continent and in Britain differed in two significant ways. coal and iron currently attained in England. This is implicit
Unlike Britain, where cotton manufacturing was mostly in our far more limited resource endowment.” Little did he
centered in Lancashire (in northwestern England) and the realize that although the industrial development of con-
Glasgow area, cotton mills in France, Germany, and, to a tinental Europe was about a generation behind Britain at
The Industrial Revolution and Its Impact on European Society 593
mid-century, after 1850 an incredibly rapid growth in con- States did not possess a large number of craftspeople, but
tinental industry would demonstrate that Britain was not, it did have a rapidly expanding farm population; its size
after all, destined to remain the world’s greatest indus- in the Northeast soon outstripped the available farmland.
trial nation. While some of this excess population, especially men,
went west, others, mostly women, found work in the new
l The Industrial Revolution in the textile and shoe factories of New England. Indeed,
women made up more than 80 percent of the laboring
United States
force in the large textile factories. In Massachusetts mill
In 1800, the United States was an agrarian society. There towns, company boarding houses provided rooms for
were no cities over 100,000, and six out of every seven large numbers of young women who worked for several
American workers were farmers. By 1860, however, the years before marriage. Outside Massachusetts, factory
population had grown from 5 to 30 million people, larger owners sought entire families including children to work
than Great Britain. Almost half of them lived west of the in their mills; one mill owner ran this advertisement in
Appalachian Mountains. The number of states had more a newspaper in Utica, New York: “Wanted: A few sober
than doubled, from sixteen to thirty-four, and nine Amer- and industrious families of at least five children each,
ican cities had over 100,000 in population. Only 50 per- over the age of eight years, are wanted at the Cotton Fac-
cent of American workers were farmers. Between 1800 and tory in Whitestown. Widows with large families would do
the eve of the Civil War, the United States had experienced well to attend this notice.” When a decline in rural births
an industrial revolution and the urbanization that accom- threatened to dry up this labor pool in the 1830s and
panied it. 1840s, European immigrants, especially poor and
The initial application of machinery to production unskilled Irish, English, Scottish, and Welsh, appeared
was accomplished—as in continental Europe—by bor- in large numbers to replace American women and chil-
rowing from Great Britain. A British immigrant, Samuel dren in the factories.
Slater, established the first textile factory using water- Women, children, and these immigrants had one
powered spinning machines in Rhode Island in 1790. By thing in common as employees; they were largely unskilled
1813, factories with power looms copied from British ver- laborers. Unskilled labor pushed American industrializa-
sions were being established. Soon thereafter, however, tion into a capital-intensive pattern. Factory owners
Americans began to equal or surpass British technical invested heavily in machines that could produce in quan-
inventions. The Harpers Ferry arsenal, for example, built tity at the hands of untrained workers. In Britain, the pace
muskets with interchangeable parts. Because all the indi- of mechanization was never as rapid because Britain’s sup-
vidual parts of a musket were identical (for example, all ply of skilled artisans made it more profitable to pursue a
triggers were the same), the final product could be put labor-intensive economy.
together quickly and easily; this enabled Americans to By 1860, the United States was well on its way to
avoid the more costly system in which skilled workers fit- being an industrial nation. In the Northeast, the most
ted together individual parts made separately. The so-called industrialized section of the country, per capita income
American system reduced costs and revolutionized pro- was 40 percent higher than the national average. Diets,
duction by saving labor, important to a society that had few it has been argued, were better and more varied;
skilled artisans. machine-made clothing was more abundant. Industri-
Unlike Britain, the United States was a large coun- alization did not necessarily lessen economic disparities,
try. The lack of a good system of internal transportation however. Despite a growing belief in a myth of social
seemed to limit American economic development by mak- mobility based upon equality of economic opportunity,
ing the transport of goods prohibitively expensive. This the reality was that the richest 10 percent of the popu-
deficiency was gradually remedied, however. Thousands lation in the cities held 70 to 80 percent of the wealth
of miles of roads and canals were built linking east and compared to 50 percent in 1800. Nevertheless, American
west. The steamboat facilitated transportation on the Great historians generally argue that while the rich got richer,
Lakes, Atlantic coastal waters, and rivers. It was espe- the poor, thanks to an increase in their purchasing power,
cially important to the Mississippi valley; by 1860, 1,000 did not get poorer.
steamboats plied that river (see the box on p. 595). Most
important of all in the development of an American trans-
portation system was the railroad. Beginning with 100 u The Social Impact of the
miles in 1830, by 1860 more than 27,000 miles of railroad
Industrial Revolution
track covered the United States. This transportation revo-
lution turned the United States into a single massive mar-
ket for the manufactured goods of the Northeast, the early Eventually, the Industrial Revolution revolutionized the
center of American industrialization. social life of Europe and the world. Although much of
Labor for the growing number of factories in this Europe remained bound by its traditional ways, already in
area came primarily from rural New England. The United the first half of the nineteenth century, the social impact
594 CHAPTER 20
L
“S–t–e–a–m–boat a–coming!”
Steamboats and railroads were crucial elements in a trans- all go hurrying from many quarters to a common center,
portation revolution that enabled industrialists to expand the wharf. Assembled there, the people fasten their eyes
markets by shipping goods cheaply and efficiently. At the upon the coming boat as upon a wonder they are seeing
same time, these marvels of technology aroused a sense of for the first time. And the boat is rather a handsome
power and excitement that was an important aspect of the sight, too. She is long and sharp and trim and pretty;
triumph of industrialization. The American novelist Mark she has two tall, fancy-topped chimneys, with a gilded
Twain captured this sense of excitement in this selection device of some kind swung between them; a fanciful
from Life on the Mississippi. pilot-house, all glass and “ginger bread,” perched on top
of the “texas” deck behind them; the paddle-boxes are
l gorgeous with a picture or with gilded rays above the
Mark Twain, Life on the Mississippi
boat’s name; the boiler deck, the hurricane deck, and
After all these years I can picture that old time to myself the texas deck are fenced and ornamented with clean
now, just as it was then: the white town drowsing in the white railings; there is a flag gallantly flying from the
sunshine of a summer’s morning; the streets empty, or jack-staff; the furnace doors are open and the fires glar-
pretty nearly so; one or two clerks sitting in front of the ing bravely; the upper decks are black with passengers;
Water street stores, with their splint-bottomed chairs the captain stands by the big bell, calm, imposing, the
tilted back against the walls, chins on breasts, hats envy of all; great volumes of the blackest smoke are
slouched over their faces, asleep; . . . two or three lonely rolling and tumbling out of the chimneys—a husbanded
little freight piles scattered about the “levee”; a pile of grandeur created with a bit of pitch pine just before
“skids” on the slope of the stone-paved wharf, and the arriving at a town; the crew are grouped on the forecas-
fragrant town drunkard asleep in the shadow of them; tle; the broad stage is run far out over the port bow, and
. . . the great Mississippi, the majestic, the magnificent an envied deck-hand stands picturesquely on the end
Mississippi, rolling its mile-wide along, shining in the of it with a coil of rope in his hand; the pent steam is
sun; the dense forest away on the other side; the “point” screaming through the gaugecocks; the captain lifts his
above the town, and the “point” below, bounding the hand, a bell rings, the wheels stop; then they turn back,
river glimpse and turning it into a sort of sea, and withal churning the water to foam, and the steam is at rest.
a very still and brilliant and lonely one. Presently a film Then such a scramble as there is to get aboard, and to
of dark smoke appears above on those remote “points”; get ashore, and to take in freight and discharge freight,
instantly a negro drayman, famous for his quick eye all at one and the same time; and such a yelling and
and prodigious voice, lifts up to cry, “S–t–e–a–m–boat cursing as the mates facilitate it all with! Ten minutes
a–coming!” and the scene changes! The town drunkard later the steamer is under way again, with no flag on the
stirs, the clerks wake up, a furious clatter of drays fol- jack-staff and no black smoke issuing from the chim-
lows, every house and store pours out a human contri- neys. After ten more minutes the town is dead again,
bution, and all in a twinkling the dead town [Hannibal, and the town drunkard asleep by the skids once more.
Missouri] is alive and moving. Drays, carts, men, boys,
of the Industrial Revolution was being felt, and future pean population stood at an estimated 140 million; by
avenues of growth were becoming apparent. Vast changes 1800, it had increased to 187 million and by 1850 to 266
in the number of people and where they lived were already million, almost twice its 1750 level.
dramatically evident. This population explosion cannot be explained by a
higher birthrate for birthrates were declining after 1790.
l Population Growth Between 1790 and 1850, Germany’s birthrate dropped
from 40 per 1,000 to 36.1; Great Britain’s from 35.4 to 32.6,
Population increases had already begun in the eighteenth and France’s from 32.5 to 26.7. The key to the expansion
century, but they became dramatic in the nineteenth cen- of population was the decline in death rates evident
tury. They were also easier to discern because record keep- throughout Europe. Historians now believe that two major
ing became more accurate. In the nineteenth century, causes explain this decline. There was a drop in the num-
governments began to take periodic censuses and sys- ber of deaths from famines, epidemics, and war. Major
tematically collect precise data on births, deaths, and mar- epidemic diseases, in particular, such as plague and small-
riages. In Britain, for example, the first census was taken pox declined noticeably, although small-scale epidemics
in 1801, and a systematic registration of births, deaths, continued. The ordinary death rate also declined as a
and marriages was begun in 1836. In 1750, the total Euro- general increase in the food supply, already evident in the
The Industrial Revolution and Its Impact on European Society 595
L
The Great Irish Famine
The Great Irish Famine was one of the nineteenth cen- on the high-road, with failing steps and dim patient
tury’s worst natural catastrophes. Overly dependent on a eyes, gazing hopelessly into infinite darkness; before
single crop, the Irish were decimated by the potato blight. them, around them, above them, nothing but darkness
In this selection, an Irish nationalist reported what he had and despair—parties of tall brawny men, once the flower
witnessed in Galway in 1847. of Meath and Galway, stalking by with a fierce but
vacant scowl; as if they knew that all this ought not to
l be, but knew not whom to blame, saw none whom they
John Mitchel, The Last Conquest of Ireland
could rend in their wrath. . . . Around those farmhouses
In the depth of winter we traveled to Galway, through which were still inhabited were to be seen hardly any
the very center of that fertile island, and saw sights that stacks of grain; the poor-rate collector, the rent agent,
will never wholly leave the eyes that beheld them— the county-cess collector had carried it off; and some-
cowering wretches, almost naked in the savage weather, times I could see in front of the cottages little children
prowling in turnip-fields, and endeavoring to grub up leaning against a fence when the sun shone out—for
roots which had been left, but running to hide as the they could not stand—their limbs fleshless, their bodies
mail-coach rolled by;—very large fields where small half naked, their faces bloated yet wrinkled, and of a
farms had been “consolidated,” showing dark bars of pale greenish hue,—children who would never, it was
fresh mold running through them where the ditches had too plain, grow up to be men and women.
been leveled;—groups and families, sitting or wandering
agricultural revolution of Britain in the late eighteenth cen- per acre as grain, gave Irish peasants a basic staple that
tury, spread to more areas. More food enabled a greater enabled them to survive and even expand in numbers. As
number of people to be better fed and therefore more resis- only an acre or two of potatoes was sufficient to feed a
tant to disease. Famine largely disappeared from western family, Irish men and women married earlier than else-
Europe, although there were dramatic exceptions in iso- where and started having children earlier as well. This led
lated areas, Ireland being the most significant. to significant growth in the population. Between 1781 and
Although industrialization itself did not cause pop- 1845, the Irish population doubled from four to eight
ulation growth, industrialized areas did experience a million. Probably half of this population depended on the
change in the composition of the population. By 1850, the potato for survival. In the summer of 1845, the potato crop
proportion of the active population involved in manufac- in Ireland was struck by blight due to a fungus that turned
turing, mining, or building had risen to 48 percent in the potatoes black. Between 1845 and 1851, the Great
Britain, 37 percent in Belgium, and 27 percent in France. Famine decimated the Irish population (see the box
But the actual areas of industrialization in 1850 were min- above). Over one million died of starvation and disease,
imal, being concentrated in northern and central England, and almost two million emigrated to the United States and
northern France, Belgium, and sections of western and Britain. Of all the European nations, only Ireland had a
eastern Germany. As one author has commented, “they declining population in the nineteenth century. But other
were islands in an agricultural sea.” countries, too, faced problems of dire poverty and declin-
This minimal industrialization, in light of the grow- ing standards of living as their populations exploded.
ing population, meant severe congestion in the country- The flight of so many Irish to America reminds us
side where a growing population divided the same amount that the traditional safety valve for overpopulation has
of land into ever-smaller plots and also created an ever- always been emigration. Between 1821 and 1850, the
larger mass of landless peasants. Overpopulation, espe- number of emigrants from Europe averaged about 110,000
cially noticeable in parts of France, northern Spain, a year. Most of these emigrants came from places like Ire-
southern Germany, Sweden, and Ireland, magnified the land and southern Germany, where peasant life had been
already existing problem of rural poverty. In Ireland, it pro- reduced to marginal existence. Times of agrarian crisis
duced the century’s greatest catastrophe. resulted in great waves of emigration. Bad harvests in
Europe in 1846–1847 (such as the catastrophe in Ireland)
/ THE GREAT HUNGER produced massive numbers of emigrants. In addition to
Ireland was one of the most oppressed areas in western the estimated 1.6 million from Ireland, for example,
Europe. The predominantly Catholic peasant population 935,000 people left Germany between 1847 and 1854.
rented land from mostly absentee British Protestant land- More often than emigrating, however, the rural masses
lords whose primary concern was collecting their rents. sought a solution to their poverty by moving to towns and
Irish peasants lived in mud hovels in desperate poverty. cities within their own countries to find work. It should not
The cultivation of the potato, a nutritious and relatively astonish us, then, that the first half of the nineteenth cen-
easy food to grow that produced three times as much food tury was a period of rapid urbanization.
596 CHAPTER 20
l The Growth of Cities
Although the Western world would not become a pre-
dominantly urban society until the twentieth century, cities
and towns had already grown dramatically in the first half
of the nineteenth century, a phenomenon related to indus-
trialization. Cities had traditionally been centers for
princely courts, government and military offices, churches,
and commerce. By 1850, especially in Great Britain
and Belgium, they were rapidly becoming places for
manufacturing and industry. With the steam engine,
entrepreneurs could locate their manufacturing plants in
urban centers where they had ready access to transporta-
tion facilities and unemployed people from the country
looking for work.
In 1800, Great Britain had one major city, London, A NEW INDUSTRIAL TOWN. Cities and towns grew
dramatically in Britain in the first half of the nineteenth
with a population of 1 million, and six cities between
century, largely as a result of industrialization. Pictured
50,000 and 100,000. Fifty years later, London’s popula- here is Saltaire, a model textile factory and town founded
tion had swelled to 2,363,000, and there were nine cities near Bradford by Titus Salt in 1851. To facilitate the
over 100,000 and eighteen cities with populations transportation of goods, the town was built on the Leeds
and Liverpool canals.
between 50,000 and 100,000. All together, these twenty-
eight cities accounted for 5.7 million or one-fifth of the
total British population. When the populations of cities
tory owners who possessed little or no tradition of public
under 50,000 are added to this total, we realize that more
service or public responsibility.
than 50 percent of the British population lived in towns
Wealthy, middle-class inhabitants, as usual, insu-
and cities by 1850. Britain was forced to become a food
lated themselves as best they could, often living in sub-
importer rather than an exporter as the number of peo-
urbs or the outer ring of the city where they could have
ple involved in agriculture declined to 20 percent of the
individual houses and gardens. In the inner ring of the city
population.
stood the small row houses, some with gardens, of the arti-
Urban populations also grew on the Continent, but
sans and lower middle class. Finally, located in the center
less dramatically. Paris had 547,000 inhabitants in 1800,
of most industrial towns were the row houses of the indus-
but only two other French cities had populations of
trial workers. This report on working-class housing in the
100,000: Lyons and Marseilles. In 1851, Paris had grown
British city of Birmingham in 1843 gives an idea of the gen-
to 1 million while Lyons and Marseilles were still under
eral conditions they faced:
200,000. German and Austrian lands had only three cities
with over 100,000 inhabitants (Vienna had 247,000) in The courts [of working-class row houses] are extremely
1800; fifty years later, there were only five, but Vienna had numerous; . . . a very large portion of the poorer classes of
grown to 440,000. As these figures show, urbanization did the inhabitants reside in them. . . . The courts vary in the
not proceed as rapidly here as in Britain; of course, neither number of the houses which they contain, from four to
twenty, and most of these houses are three stories high, and
had industrialization. Even in Belgium, the most heavily
built, as it is termed, back to back. There is a wash-house,
industrialized country on the Continent, almost 50 percent
an ash-pit, and a privy at the end, or on one side of the
of the male workforce was still engaged in agriculture by
court, and not unfrequently one or more pigsties and heaps
midcentury. of manure. Generally speaking, the privies in the old courts
are in a most filthy condition. Many which we have
/ URBAN LIVING CONDITIONS IN THE EARLY inspected were in a state which renders it impossible for
us to conceive how they could be used; they were with-
INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
out doors and overflowing with filth.
The dramatic growth of cities in the first half of the nine-
teenth century produced miserable living conditions for The people who lived in such houses were actually the
many of the inhabitants. Of course, the quality of life had fortunate; the truly unfortunate were those forced to live
been poor for centuries for many people in European in cellars. One reformer asked, “How can a hole under-
cities, but the rapid urbanization associated with the ground of from 12 to 15 feet square admit of ventilation
Industrial Revolution intensified the problems in the first so as to fit it for a human habitation?” Rooms were not
half of the nineteenth century and made these wretched large and were frequently overcrowded, as this govern-
conditions all the more apparent. City authorities of what- ment report of 1838 revealed: “I entered several of the ten-
ever kind either felt little responsibility for these conditions ements. In one of them, on the ground floor, I found six
or more frequently did not have the skills to cope with the persons occupying a very small room, two in bed, ill with
complex, new problems associated with such rapidly grow- fever. In the room above this were two more persons in
ing populations. City authorities might also often be fac- one bed ill with fever.” Another report said: “There were
The Industrial Revolution and Its Impact on European Society 597
63 families where there were at least five persons to one in the 1820s. In Britain the Poor Law Commissioners pro-
bed; and there were some in which even six were packed duced detailed reports. The investigators were often struck
in one bed, lying at the top and bottom—children and by the physically and morally debilitating effects of urban
adults.”6 industrial life on the poor. They observed, for example,
Sanitary conditions in these towns were appalling. that young working-class men were considerably shorter
Due to the lack of municipal direction, city streets were and scrawnier than the sons of middle-class families and
often used as sewers and open drains: “In the center of this much more subject to disease. They were especially
street is a gutter, into which potato parings, the refuse of alarmed by what they considered the moral consequences
animal and vegetable matters of all kinds, the dirty water of such living conditions: prostitution, crime, and sexual
from the washing of clothes and of the houses, are all immoralities, all of which they saw as the effect of such
poured, and there they stagnate and putrefy.”7Unable to squalid lives.
deal with human excrement, cities in the new industrial To many of the well-to-do middle classes, this situ-
era smelled horrible and were extraordinarily unhealthy. ation presented a clear danger to society. Were not these
Towns and cities were fundamentally death traps. As masses of workers, sunk in crime, disease, and immoral-
deaths outnumbered births in most large cities in the first ity, a potential threat to their own well-being? Might not
half of the nineteenth century, only a constant influx of the masses be organized and used by unscrupulous dem-
people from the country kept them alive and growing. agogues to overthrow the established order? One of the
Adding to the deterioration of urban life was the most eloquent British reformers of the 1830s and 1840s,
adulteration of food. Consumers were defrauded in a vari- James Kay-Shuttleworth, described them as “volcanic ele-
ety of ways: alum was added to make bread look white ments, by whose explosive violence the structure of soci-
and hence more expensive; beer and milk were watered ety may be destroyed.” Another observer spoke more
down; and red lead despite its poisonous qualities was contemptuously in 1850:
substituted for pepper. The government refused to inter-
vene; a parliamentary committee stated that “more ben- They live precisely like brutes, to gratify . . . the appetites
efit is likely to result from the effects of a free competition of their uncultivated bodies, and then die, to go they have
. . . than can be expected to result from any regulations.” never thought, cared, or wondered whither. . . . Brought up
in the darkness of barbarism, they have no idea that it is
It was not until 1875 that an effective Food and Drugs Act
possible for them to attain any higher condition; they are
was passed in Britain.
not even sentient enough to desire to change their situation.
Our knowledge of the pathetic conditions in the early
. . . they eat, drink, breed, work and die; and . . . the richer
industrial cities is largely derived from an abundance of and more intelligent classes are obliged to guard them with
social investigations. Such investigations began in France police.8
SLUMS OF INDUSTRIAL
LONDON. Industrialization
and rapid urban growth
produced dreadful living
conditions in many
nineteenth-century cities.
Filled with garbage and
human waste, cities often
smelled terrible and were
extremely unhealthy. This
drawing by Gustave Doré
shows a London slum
district overshadowed by
rail viaducts.
598 CHAPTER 20
Some observers were less arrogant, however, and officials at various levels. At the lower end of the economic
wondered if the workers could be held responsible for scale were master craftspeople and shopkeepers.
their fate. Lest we make the industrial middle class too much
One of the best of a new breed of urban reformers of an abstraction, we need to look at who the new indus-
was Edwin Chadwick (1800–1890). With a background trial entrepreneurs actually were. These were the people
in law, Chadwick became obsessed with eliminating the who constructed the factories, purchased the machines,
poverty and squalor of the metropolitan areas. He became and figured out where the markets were. Their qualities
a civil servant and was soon appointed to a number of included resourcefulness, single-mindedness, resolution,
government investigatory commissions. As secretary of initiative, vision, ambition, and often, of course, greed. As
the Poor Law Commission, he initiated a passionate Jedediah Strutt, the cotton manufacturer said, “Getting
search for detailed facts about the living conditions of the of money...is the main business of the life of men.”
working classes. After three years of investigation, Chad- But this was not an easy task. The early industrial
wick summarized the results in his Report on the Condi- entrepreneurs were called upon to superintend an enor-
tion of the Labouring Population of Great Britain, mous array of functions that are handled today by teams
published in 1842. In it he concluded that “the various of managers; they raised capital, determined markets, set
forms of epidemic, endemic, and other disease” were company objectives, organized the factory and its labor,
directly caused by the “atmospheric impurities produced and trained supervisors who could act for them. The
by decomposing animal and vegetable substances, by opportunities for making money were great, but the risks
damp and filth, and close overcrowded dwellings [pre- were also tremendous. The cotton trade, for example,
vailing] amongst the population in every part of the king- which was so important to the early Industrial Revolution,
dom.” Such conditions, he argued, could be eliminated. was intensely competitive. Only through constant expan-
As to the means: “The primary and most important mea- sion could one feel secure, so early entrepreneurs rein-
sures, and at the same time the most practicable, and vested most of their initial profits. Fear of bankruptcy was
within the recognized province of public administration, constant, especially among small firms. Furthermore, most
are drainage, the removal of all refuse of habitations, early industrial enterprises were small. Even by the 1840s,
streets, and roads, and the improvement of the supplies only 10 percent of British industrial firms employed more
of water.”9In other words, Chadwick was advocating a than 5,000 workers; 43 percent had fewer than 100 work-
system of modern sanitary reforms consisting of efficient ers. As entrepreneurs went bankrupt, new people could
sewers and a supply of piped water. Six years after his enter the race for profits, especially since the initial outlay
report and largely due to his efforts, Britain’s first Public required was not gigantic. In 1816, only one mill in five in
Health Act created a National Board of Health empow- the important industrial city of Manchester was in the
ered to form local boards that would establish modern hands of its original owners.
sanitary systems. The social origins of industrial entrepreneurs were
Many middle-class citizens were quite willing to sup- incredibly diverse. Many of the most successful came from
port the public health reforms of men like Chadwick a mercantile background. Three London merchants, for
because of their fear of cholera. Outbreaks of this deadly example, founded a successful ironworks in Wales that
disease had ravaged Europe in the early 1830s and late owned eight steam engines and employed 5,000 men. In
1840s and were especially rampant in the overcrowded Britain, land and domestic industry were often interde-
cities. As city authorities and wealthier residents became pendent. Joshua Fielden, for example, acquired sufficient
convinced that filthy conditions helped to spread the dis- capital to establish a factory by running a family sheep
ease, they began to support the call for new public health farm while working looms in the farmhouse. Intelligent,
measures. clever, and ambitious apprentices who had learned their
trades well could also strike it rich. William Radcliffe’s fam-
ily engaged in agriculture and spinning and weaving at
l New Social Classes: The Industrial home; he learned quickly how to succeed:
Middle Class
Availing myself of the improvements that came out while I
The rise of industrial capitalism produced a new middle- was in my teens . . . with my little savings and a practical
knowledge of every process from the cotton bag to the piece
class group. The bourgeois or middle class was not new;
of cloth . . . I was ready to commence business for myself
it had existed since the emergence of cities in the Middle
and by the year 1789 I was well established and employed
Ages. Originally, the bourgeois was the burgher or town
many hands both in spinning and weaving as a master
dweller, whether active as a merchant, official, artisan, manufacturer.10
lawyer, or scholar, who enjoyed a special set of rights from
the charter of the town. As wealthy townspeople bought By 1801, Radcliffe was operating a factory employing
land, the original meaning of the word bourgeois became 1,000 workers.
lost, and the term came to include people involved in com- Members of dissenting religious minorities were
merce, industry, and banking as well as professionals, often prominent among the early industrial leaders
such as lawyers, teachers, physicians, and government of Britain. The Darbys and Lloyds who were iron
The Industrial Revolution and Its Impact on European Society 599
manufacturers, the Barclays and Lloyds who were Within the cities, artisans or craftspeople remained
bankers, and the Trumans and Perkins who were brew- the largest group of urban workers during the first half of
ers were all Quakers. These were expensive trades and the nineteenth century. They worked in numerous small
depended upon the financial support that co-religionists industries, such as shoemaking, glovemaking, bookbind-
in religious minorities provided for each other. Most his- ing, printing, and bricklaying. Some craftspeople formed a
torians believe that a major reason members of these reli- kind of aristocracy of labor, especially those employed in
gious minorities were so prominent in business was that such luxury trades as coachbuilding and clockmaking who
they lacked other opportunities. Legally excluded from earned higher wages than others. Artisans were not fac-
many public offices, they directed their ambitions into the tory workers; they were traditionally organized in guilds
new industrial capitalism. where they passed on their skills to apprentices. But guilds
It is interesting to note that in Britain in particular were increasingly losing their power, especially in indus-
aristocrats also became entrepreneurs. The Lambtons in trialized countries. Fearful of losing out to the new facto-
Northumberland, the Curwens in Cumberland, the Nor- ries that could produce goods more cheaply, artisans
folks in Yorkshire, and the Dudleys in Staffordshire all tended to support movements against industrialization.
invested in mining enterprises. This close relationship Industrialists welcomed the decline of skilled craftspeople,
between land and industry helped Britain to assume the as one perceptive old tailor realized in telling his life story:
leadership role in the early Industrial Revolution.
By 1850, in Britain at least, the kind of traditional It is upwards of 30 years since I first went to work at the
tailoring trade in London. . . . I continued working for the
entrepreneurship that had created the Industrial Revolu-
honorable trade and belonging to the Society [for tailors] for
tion was declining and was being replaced by a new busi-
about 15 years. My weekly earnings then averaged £1 16s.
ness aristocracy. This new generation of entrepreneurs
a week while I was at work, and for several years I was
stemmed from the professional and industrial middle seldom out of work . . . no one could have been happier
classes, especially as sons inherited the successful busi- than I was. . . . But then, with my sight defective . . . I could
nesses established by their fathers. It must not be forgot- get no employment at the honorable trade, and that was
ten, however, that even after 1850 a large number of small the ruin of me entirely; for working there, of course, I got
“scratched” from the trade society, and so lost all hope of
businesses existed in Britain and some were still founded
being provided for by them in my helplessness. The work-
by people from humble backgrounds. Indeed, the age of
shop . . . was about seven feet square, and so low, that as
large-scale corporate capitalism did not begin until the
you [sat] on the floor you could touch the ceiling with the
1890s (see Chapter 23). tip of your finger. In this place seven of us worked. [The
Increasingly, the new industrial entrepreneurs—the master] paid little more than half the regular wages, and
bankers and owners of factories and mines—came to employed such men as myself—only those who couldn’t
amass much wealth and play an important role alongside get anything better to do. . . . I don’t think my wages there
averaged above 12s. a week. . . . I am convinced I lost my
the traditional landed elites of their societies. The Indus-
eyesight by working in that cheap shop. . . . It is by the ruin
trial Revolution began at a time when the pre-industrial
of such men as me that these masters are enabled to under-
agrarian world was still largely dominated by landed elites.
sell the better shops. . . . That’s the way, sir, the cheap
As the new bourgeoisie bought great estates and acquired clothes is produced, by making blind beggars of the work-
social respectability, they also sought political power, and men, like myself, and throwing us on the parish in our old
in the course of the nineteenth century, their wealthiest age.11
members would merge with those old elites.
Servants also formed another large group of urban work-
ers, especially in major cities like London and Paris. Many
l New Social Classes: Workers in the were women from the countryside who became utterly
Industrial Age dependent upon their upper- and middle-class employers.
At the same time the members of the industrial middle
class were seeking to reduce the barriers between them- / WORKING CONDITIONS FOR THE
selves and the landed elite, they also were trying to sep- INDUSTRIAL WORKING CLASS
arate themselves from the laboring classes below them. Workers in the new industrial factories also faced wretched
The working class was actually a mixture of different working conditions. We have already observed the psy-
groups in the first half of the nineteenth century. In the chological traumas workers experienced from their
course of the nineteenth century, factory workers would employers’ efforts to break old preindustrial work patterns
form an industrial proletariat, but in the first half of that and create a well-disciplined labor force. But what were
century, they by no means constituted a majority of the the physical conditions of the factories?
working class in any major city, even in Britain. According Unquestionably, in the early decades of the Indus-
to the 1851 census in Britain, there were 1.8 million agri- trial Revolution, “places of work,” as early factories were
cultural laborers and 1 million domestic servants, but only called, were dreadful. Work hours ranged from twelve to
811,000 workers in the cotton and woolen industries. Even sixteen hours a day, six days a week, with a half hour for
one-third of these were still working in small workshops or lunch and dinner. There was no security of employment
in their own homes. and no minimum wage. The worst conditions were in the
600 CHAPTER 20
cotton mills where temperatures were especially debilitat- to crawl under machines to gather loose cotton. Moreover,
ing. One report noted that “in the cotton-spinning work, children were more easily broken to factory work. Above
these creatures are kept, fourteen hours in each day, all, children represented a cheap supply of labor. In 1821,
locked up, summer and winter, in a heat of from eighty 49 percent of the British people were under twenty years
to eighty-four degrees.” Mills were also dirty, dusty, and of age. Hence, children made up a particularly abundant
unhealthy: supply of labor, and they were paid only about one-sixth
or one-third of what a man was paid. In the cotton facto-
Not only is there not a breath of sweet air in these truly
ries in 1838, children under eighteen made up 29 per-
infernal scenes, but . . . there is the abominable and perni-
cent of the total workforce; children as young as seven
cious stink of the gas to assist in the murderous effects of
worked twelve to fifteen hours per day six days a week in
the heat. In addition to the noxious effluvia of the gas,
mixed with the steam, there are the dust, and what is called cotton mills.
cotton-flyings or fuz, which the unfortunate creatures have Especially terrible in the early Industrial Revolution
to inhale; and . . . the notorious fact is that well constitu- was the use of so-called pauper apprentices. These were
tioned men are rendered old and past labor at forty years of orphans or children abandoned by their parents who had
age, and that children are rendered decrepit and deformed,
wound up in the care of local parishes. To save on their
and thousands upon thousands of them slaughtered by
upkeep, parish officials found it convenient to appren-
consumptions, before they arrive at the age of sixteen.12
tice them to factory owners looking for a cheap source of
Thus ran a report on working conditions in the cotton labor. These children worked long hours under strict dis-
industry in 1824. cipline and received inadequate food and recreation; many
Conditions in the coal mines were also harsh. The became deformed from being kept too long in unusual
introduction of steam power meant only that steam- positions. Although economic liberals and some indus-
powered engines mechanically lifted coal to the top. Inside trialists were against all state intervention in economic
the mines, men still bore the burden of digging the coal out matters, Parliament eventually remedied some of the worst
while horses, mules, women, and children hauled coal ills of child abuse in factories and mines (see Efforts at
carts on rails to the lift. Dangers abounded in coal mines; Change: Reformers and Government later in this chapter).
cave-ins, explosions, and gas fumes (called “bad air”) were The legislation of the 1830s and 1840s, however, primar-
a way of life. The cramped conditions—tunnels often did ily affected child labor in textile factories and mines. It did
not exceed three or four feet in height—and constant not touch the use of children in small workshops or the
dampness in the mines resulted in deformed bodies and nonfactory trades that were not protected. As these trades
ruined lungs. were in competition with the new factories, conditions
Both children and women were employed in large there were often even worse. Pottery works, for example,
numbers in early factories and mines. Children had were not investigated until the 1860s when it was found
been an important part of the family economy in pre- that 17 percent of the workers were under eleven years
industrial times, working in the fields or carding and spin- of age. One investigator reported what he found:
ning wool at home with the growth of cottage industry.
In the Industrial Revolution, however, child labor was The boys were kept in constant motion throughout the day,
each carrying from thirty to fifty dozen of molds into the
exploited more than ever and in a considerably more sys-
stoves, and remaining . . . long enough to take the dried
tematic fashion (see the boxes on pp. 602–603). The own-
earthenware away. The distance thus run by a boy in the
ers of cotton factories appreciated certain features of child
course of a day . . . was estimated at seven miles. From the
labor. Children had an especially delicate touch as spin- very nature of this exhausting occupation children were
ners of cotton. Their smaller size made it easier for them rendered pale, weak and unhealthy. In the depth of winter,
WOMEN IN THE MINES.
Both women and children
were often employed in the
early factories and mines
of the nineteenth century.
As is evident in this illus-
tration of a woman drag-
ging a cart loaded with
coal behind her, they often
worked under very trying
conditions.
The Industrial Revolution and Its Impact on European Society 601
L
Child Labor: Discipline in the Textile Mills
Child labor was certainly not new, but in the early Indus- Marshall’s mills at Shrewsbury, where the customary
trial Revolution it was exploited more systematically. hours when work was brisk were generally 5 A.M.to
These selections are taken from the Report of Sadler’s 8 P.M.,sometimes from 5:30 A.M.to 8 or 9:
Committee, which was commissioned in 1832 to inquire What means were taken to keep the children awake
into the condition of child factory workers. and vigilant, especially at the termination of such a
day’s labor as you have described?—There was gener-
l ally a blow or a box, or a tap with a strap, or sometimes
How They Kept the Children Awake
the hand.
It is a very frequent thing at Mr. Marshall’s [at Shrews- Have you yourself been strapped?—Yes, most
bury} where the least children were employed (for there severely, till I could not bear to sit upon a chair without
were plenty working at six years of age), for Mr. Horse- having pillows, and through that I left. I was strapped
man to start the mill earlier in the morning than he for- both on my own legs, and then I was put upon a man’s
merly did; and provided a child should be drowsy, the back, and then strapped and buckled with two straps to
overlooker walks round the room with a stick in his an iron pillar, and flogged, and all by one overlooker;
hand, and he touches that child on the shoulder, and after that he took a piece of tow, and twisted it in the
says, “Come here.” In a corner of the room there is an shape of a cord, and put it in my mouth, and tied it
iron cistern; it is filled with water; he takes this boy, and behind my head.
takes him up by the legs, and dips him over head in the He gagged you?—Yes; and then he orders me to run
cistern, and sends him to work for the remainder of the round a part of the machinery where he was overlooker,
day.... and he stood at one end, and every time I came there he
What means were taken to keep the children to their struck me with a stick, which I believe was an ash plant,
work?—Sometimes they would tap them over the head, and which he generally carried in his hand, and some-
or nip them over the nose, or give them a pinch of snuff, times he hit me, and sometimes he did not; and one of
or throw water in their faces, or pull them off where they the men in the room came and begged me off, and that
were, and job them about to keep them waking. he let me go, and not beat me any more, and conse-
quently he did.
l You have been beaten with extraordinary severity?—
The Sadistic Overlooker
Yes, I was beaten so that I had not power to cry at all, or
Samuel Downe, age 29, factory worker living near hardly speak at one time. What age were you at that
Leeds; at the age of about ten began work at Mr. time?—Between 10 and 11.
with the thermometer in the open air sometimes below zero, of the entire family, and it seemed perfectly natural to con-
boys, with little clothing but rags, might be seen running to tinue this pattern. Men migrating from the countryside to
and fro on errands or to their dinners with the perspiration industrial towns and cities took their wives and children
on their foreheads, “after laboring for hours like little
with them into the factory or into the mines. Of 136
slaves.” The inevitable result of such transitions of tempera-
employees in Robert Peel’s factory at Bury in 1801, 95
ture were consumption, asthma, and acute inflammation.13
belonged to twenty-six families. The impetus for this fam-
Little wonder that child labor legislation enacted in 1864 ily work often came from the family itself. The factory
included pottery works. owner Jedediah Strutt was opposed to child labor under
By 1830, women and children made up two-thirds ten but was forced by parents to take children as young as
of the cotton industry’s labor. However, as the number of seven.
children employed declined under the Factory Act of 1833, The employment of large numbers of women in fac-
their places were taken by women, who came to dominate tories did not produce a significant transformation in
the labor forces of the early factories. Women made up 50 female working patterns, as was once assumed. Studies of
percent of the labor force in textile (cotton and woolen) urban households in France and Britain, for example, have
factories before 1870. They were mostly unskilled labor revealed that throughout the nineteenth century tradi-
and were paid half or less of what men received. Excessive tional types of female labor still predominated in the
working hours for women were outlawed in 1844, but only women’s work world. In 1851, fully 40 percent of the
in textile factories and mines; not until 1867 were they out- female workforce in Britain consisted of domestic servants.
lawed in craft workshops. In France, the largest group of female workers, 40 percent,
The employment of children and women in large worked in agriculture. In addition, only 20 percent of
part represents a continuation of a preindustrial kinship female workers in Britain labored in factories, and only 10
pattern. Cottage industry had always involved the efforts percent did so in France. Regional and local studies have
602 CHAPTER 20
L
Child Labor: The Mines
After examining conditions in British coal mines, a gov- Do they work in the same way now exactly?—Yes,
ernment official commented that “the hardest labor in the they do; they have nothing more than a bit of bread and
worst room in the worst-conducted factory is less hard, cheese in their pocket, and sometimes can’t eat it all,
less cruel, and less demoralizing than the labor in the best owing to the dust and damp and badness of air; and
of coal-mines.” Yet it was not until 1842 that legislation sometimes it is as hot as an oven; sometimes I have
was passed eliminating the labor of boys under ten from seen it so hot as to melt a candle.
the mines. This selection is taken from a government What are the usual wages of a boy of eight?—They
report on the mines in Lancashire. used to get 3d or 4d a day. Now a man’s wages is
divided into eight eighths; and when a boy is eight years
l old he gets one of those eighths; at eleven, two eighths;
The Black Holes of Worsley
at thirteen, three eighths; at fifteen, four eighths; at
Examination of Thomas Gibson and George Bryan, twenty, man’s wages.
witnesses from the coal mines at Worsley: What are the wages of a man?—About 15s if he is in
Have you worked from a boy in a coal mine?— full employment, but often not more than 10s, and out
(Both) Yes. of that he has to get his tools and candles. He consumes
What had you to do then?—Thrutching the basket about four candles in nine hours’ work, in some places
and drawing. It is done by little boys; one draws the six; 6d per pound, and twenty-four candles to the
basket and the other pushes it behind. Is that hard pound.
labor?—Yes, very hard labor. Were you ever beaten as a child?—Yes, many a score
For how many hours a day did you work?—Nearly of times; both kicks and thumps.
nine hours regularly; sometimes twelve; I have worked Are many girls employed in the pits?—Yes, a vast of
about thirteen. We used to go in at six in the morning, those. They do the same kind of work as the boys till
and took a bit of bread and cheese in our pocket, and they get about 14 years of age, when they get the wages
stopped two or three minutes; and some days nothing of half a man, and never get more, and continue at the
at all to eat. same work for many years.
How was it that sometimes you had nothing to eat?— Did they ever fight together?—Yes, many days
We were over-burdened. I had only a mother, and she together. Both boys and girls; sometimes they are very
had nothing to give me. I was sometimes half loving with one another.
starved....
also found that most of the workers were single women. increased living standards dramatically in the form of
Few married women worked outside their homes. higher per capita incomes and greater consumer choices.
The Factory Acts that limited the work hours of chil- But did the first generation of industrial workers experi-
dren and women also began to break up the traditional ence a decline in their living standards and suffer un-
kinship pattern of work and led to a new pattern based on necessarily? Some historians have argued that early
a separation of work and home. Men came to be regarded industrialization required huge profits to be reinvested in
as responsible for the primary work obligations as women new and ever more expensive equipment; thus, to make
assumed daily control of the family and performed low- the requisite profits, industrialists had to keep wages low.
paying jobs such as laundry work that could be done in Others have questioned that argument, pointing out that
the home. Domestic industry made it possible for women initial investments in early machinery were not neces-
to continue their contributions to family survival. sarily large nor did they need to be. What certainly did
Historians have also reminded us that if the treat- occur in the first half of the nineteenth century was a
ment of children in the mines and factories seems partic- widening gap between rich and poor. One estimate, based
ularly cruel and harsh, contemporary treatment of children on income tax returns in Britain, is that the wealthiest
in general was often brutal. Beatings, for example, had 1 percent of the population increased its share of the
long been regarded, even by dedicated churchmen and national product from 25 percent in 1801 to 35 percent
churchwomen, as the best way to discipline children. in 1848.
Wages, prices, and consumption patterns are some
l Standards of Living of the criteria used for measuring the standard of living.
Between 1780 and 1850, as far as we can determine from
One of the most heated debates on the Industrial Revo- the available evidence, both wages and prices fluctuated
lution concerns the standard of living. Most historians widely. Most historians believe that during the Napoleonic
assume that in the long run the Industrial Revolution wars the increase in prices outstripped wages. Between
The Industrial Revolution and Its Impact on European Society 603
1815 and 1830, a price fall was accompanied by a slight They favored a working-class struggle against employers,
increase in wages. But from 1830 to the late 1840s, real but only to win improvements for the members of their
wages seem to have improved although regional variations own trades.
make generalizations dangerous. Some trade unions were even willing to strike to gain
When we look at consumption patterns, we find that their goals. Bitter strikes were carried out by hand-loom
in Britain in 1850 tea, sugar, and coffee were still semilux- weavers in Glasgow in 1813, cotton spinners in Man-
uries consumed primarily by the upper and middle classes chester in 1818, and miners in Northumberland and
and better-off artisans. Meat consumption per capita was Durham in 1810. Such blatant illegal activity caused
less in 1840 than in 1780. On the other hand, a mass mar- Parliament to repeal the Combination Acts in 1824,
ket had developed in the cheap cotton goods so important accepting the argument of some members that the acts
to the Industrial Revolution. As a final note on the ques- themselves had so alienated workers that they had formed
tion of the standard of living, some historians who take a unions. Unions were now tolerated, but other legislation
positive view of the early Industrial Revolution have ques- enabled authorities to keep close watch over their
tioned what would have happened to Britain’s growing activities.
population without the Industrial Revolution. Would it In the 1820s and 1830s, the union movement
have gone the way of Ireland’s in the Great Hunger of the began to focus on the creation of national unions. One
mid-nineteenth century? No one really knows. of the leaders in this effort was a well-known cotton
No doubt the periodic crises of overproduction that
haunted industrialization from its beginnings caused even
further economic hardship. Short-term economic depres-
A TRADE UNION MEMBERSHIP CARD. Skilled workers in
sions brought high unemployment and increased social
a number of new industries formed trade unions in an
tensions. Unemployment figures could be astronomical. attempt to gain higher wages, better working conditions,
During one of these economic depressions in 1842, for and special benefits. The scenes at the bottom of this
example, 60 percent of the factory employees in Bolton membership card for the Associated Shipwright’s Society
illustrate some of the medical and social benefits it
were laid off. Cyclical depressions were particularly dev-
provided for its members.
astating in towns whose prosperity rested on one industry.
Overall we can say that some evidence exists for
an increase in real wages for the working classes between
1790 and 1850, especially in the 1840s. But can standards
of living be assessed only in terms of prices, wages, and
consumption patterns? No doubt those meant little to peo-
ple who faced dreadful housing, adulterated food, public
health hazards, and the psychological traumas associated
with a complete change in work habits and way of life. The
real gainers in the early Industrial Revolution were mem-
bers of the middle class—and some skilled workers whose
jobs were not eliminated by the new machines. But indus-
trial workers themselves would have to wait until the sec-
ond half of the nineteenth century to reap the benefits of
industrialization.
l Efforts at Change: The Workers
Before long, workers looked to the formation of labor orga-
nizations to gain decent wages and working conditions.
The British government, reacting against the radicalism of
the French revolutionary working classes, had passed a
series of Combination Acts in 1799 and 1800 outlawing
associations of workers. The legislation failed to prevent
the formation of trade unions, however. Similar to the craft
societies of earlier times, these new associations were
formed by skilled workers in a number of new industries,
including the cotton spinners, ironworkers, coal miners,
and shipwrights. These unions served two purposes. One
was to preserve their own workers’ position by limiting
entry into their trade; another was to gain benefits from the
employers. These early trade unions had limited goals.
604 CHAPTER 20
magnate and social reformer, Robert Owen (1771–1858). the ultimate acceptance of all the points of the People’s
Owen came to believe in the creation of voluntary asso- Charter in the future.
ciations that would demonstrate to others the benefits of
cooperative rather than competitive living (see Chapter l Efforts at Change: Reformers
21 on the utopian socialists). Although Owen’s program
and Government
was not directed specifically to trade unionists, his ideas
had great appeal to some of their leaders. Under Owen’s Efforts to improve the worst conditions of the industrial
direction, plans emerged for a Grand National Consoli- factory system also came from outside the ranks of the
dated Trades Union, which was formed in February 1834. working classes. From its beginning, the Industrial Revo-
As a national federation of trade unions, its primary pur- lution had drawn much criticism. Romantic poets like
pose was to coordinate a general strike for the eight-hour William Wordsworth (see Chapter 21) decried the destruc-
working day. Rhetoric, however, soon outpaced reality, tion of the natural world:
and by the summer of the same year, the lack of real
I grieve, when on the darker side
working-class support led to its total collapse. Afterward,
Of this great change I look; and there behold
the union movement reverted to trade unions for indi-
Such outrage done to nature as compels
vidual crafts. The largest and most successful was the
The indignant power to justify herself.
Amalgamated Society of Engineers, formed in 1850. Its
provision of generous unemployment benefits in return Reform-minded individuals, be they factory owners who
for a small weekly payment was precisely the kind of felt twinges of conscience or social reformers in Parlia-
practical gains these trade unions sought. Larger goals ment, campaigned against the evils of the industrial fac-
would have to wait. tory, especially condemning the abuse of children. One
Trade unionism was not the only type of collective hoped for the day “that these little ones should once more
action by workers in the early decades of the Industrial see the rising and setting of the sun.”
Revolution. The Luddites were skilled craftspeople in the As it became apparent that the increase in wealth
Midlands and northern England who in 1812 attacked the generated by the Industrial Revolution was accompanied
machines that they believed threatened their livelihoods. by ever-increasing numbers of poor people, more and more
These attacks failed to stop the industrial mechanization efforts were made to document and deal with the prob-
of Britain and have been viewed as utterly naive. Some lems. As reports from civic-minded citizens and parlia-
historians, however, have also seen them as an intense mentary commissions intensified and demonstrated the
eruption of feeling against unrestrained industrial capital- extent of poverty, degradation, and suffering, the reform
ism. The inability of 12,000 troops to find the culprits pro- efforts began to succeed.
vides stunning evidence of the local support they received Their first success was a series of Factory Acts passed
in their areas. between 1802 and 1819 that limited labor for children
A much more meaningful expression of the between the ages of nine and sixteen to twelve hours a day;
attempts of British workers to improve their condition the employment of children under nine years old was for-
developed in the movement known as Chartism. It was bidden. Moreover, the laws stipulated that children were
the first “important political movement of working men to receive instruction in reading and arithmetic during
organized during the nineteenth century.” Its aim was working hours. But these acts applied only to cotton mills,
to achieve political democracy. A People’s Charter drawn not to factories or mines where some of the worst abuses
up in 1838 demanded universal male suffrage, payment were taking place. Just as important, no provision was
for members of Parliament, and annual sessions of Par- made for enforcing the acts through a system of inspection.
liament (see the box on p. 606). Two national petitions In the reform-minded decades of the 1830s and
incorporating these points, affixed with millions of sig- 1840s, new legislation was passed. The Factory Act of
natures, were presented to Parliament in 1839 and 1842. 1833 strengthened earlier labor legislation. All textile fac-
Both were rejected by the members of Parliament who tories were now included. Children between nine and thir-
were not at all ready for political democracy. As one teen could work only eight hours a day; those between
member said, universal suffrage would be “fatal to all the thirteen and eighteen, twelve hours. Factory inspectors
purposes for which government exists” and was “utterly were appointed with the power to fine those who broke the
incompatible with the very existence of civilization.” After law. Another piece of legislation in 1833 required that chil-
1843, Chartism as a movement had largely played itself dren between nine and thirteen have at least two hours of
out. It had never really posed a serious threat to the elementary education during the working day. In 1847, the
British establishment, but it had not been a total failure Ten Hours Act reduced the work day for children between
either. Its true significance stemmed from its ability to thirteen and eighteen to ten hours. Women were also now
arouse and organize millions of working-class men and included in the ten-hour limitation. In 1842, a Coal Mines
women, to give them a sense of working-class con- Act eliminated the employment of boys under ten and
sciousness that they had not really possessed before. This women in mines. Eventually, men too would benefit from
political education of working people was important to the move to restrict factory hours.
The Industrial Revolution and Its Impact on European Society 605
L
The Political Demands of the Chartist Movement
In the late 1830s and early 1840s, working-class protest The suffrage, to be exempt from the corruption of
centered on achieving a clear set of political goals, partic- the wealthy and the violence of the powerful, must be
ularly universal male suffrage, as the means to achieve secret.... To public safety, as well as public confidence,
economic and social improvements. This selection is taken frequent elections are essential. Therefore, we demand
from one of the national petitions presented to Parliament annual parliaments. With power to choose, and freedom
by the Chartist movement. Although the petition failed, in choosing, the range of our choice must be unre-
Chartism helped to arouse and organize millions of stricted. We are compelled, by existing laws, to take for
workers. our representatives men who are incapable of appreciat-
ing our difficulties, or have little sympathy with them;
l merchants who have retired from trade and no longer
National Petition (1839)
feel its harassings; proprietors of land who are alike
To the Honorable the Commons of the United Kingdom ignorant of its evils and its cure; lawyers by whom the
of Great Britain and Ireland, in Parliament assembled, notoriety of the senate is courted only as a means of
the Petition of the undersigned, their suffering country- obtaining notice in the courts.... We demand that in
men, HUMBLY SHOWS,— the future election of members of your ... house, the
The energies of a mighty kingdom have been wasted approbation of the constituency shall be the sole qualifi-
in building up the power of selfish and ignorant men, cation, and that to every representative so chosen, shall
and its resources squandered for their aggrandizement. be assigned out of the public taxes, a fair and adequate
The good of a part has been advanced at the sacrifice of remuneration for the time which he is called upon to
the good of the nation. The few have governed for the devote to the public service.... Universal suffrage will,
interest of the few, while the interests of the many have and it alone can, bring true and lasting peace to the
been sottishly neglected, or insolently ... trampled nation; we firmly believe that it will also bring prosperity.
upon.... We come before your honorable house to tell May it therefore please your honorable house, to take
you, with all humility, that this state of things must not this our petition into your most serious consideration,
be permitted to continue. That it cannot long continue, and to use your utmost endeavors, by all constitutional
without very seriously endangering the stability of the means, to have a law passed, granting to every male of
throne, and the peace of the kingdom, and that if, by lawful age, sane mind, and unconvicted of crime, the
God’s help, and all lawful and constitutional appliances, right of voting for members of parliament, and directing
an end can be put to it, we are fully resolved that it shall all future elections of members of parliament to be in
speedily come to an end.... Required, as we are univer- the way of secret ballot, and ordaining that the dura-
sally, to support and obey the laws, nature and reason tion of parliament, so chosen, shall in no case exceed
entitle us to demand that in the making of the laws one year, and abolishing all property qualifications
the universal voice shall be implicitly listened to. We in the members, and providing for their due remu-
perform the duties of freemen; we must have the neration while in attendance on their parliamen-
privileges of freemen. Therefore, we demand universal tary duties.
suffrage.
1770 1788 1806 1824 1842 1860
Watt’s steam engine Stephenson’s Rocket
Cartwright’s power loom Great Exhibition in Britain
First textile factory in the United States Factory Act
People’s Charter Chadwick’s Report on Cities
Formation of Owen’s List’s National
Grand National System of Political Great Famine
Luddites Trades Union Economy in Ireland
606 CHAPTER 20
Conclusion LLLLLLLLLLLL
10. Quoted in Eric J. Evans, The Forging of the Modern State:
Early Industrial Britain, 1783–1870(London, 1983),
p. 113.
The Industrial Revolution became one of the major
11. Henry Mayhew, London Labour and the London Poor
forces of change in the nineteenth century as it led West-
(London, 1851), 1:342–343.
ern civilization into the industrial era that has character-
12. Quoted in Pike, Human Documents of the Industrial
ized the modern world. Beginning in Britain, its spread Revolution in Britain,pp. 60–61.
to the Continent and the new American nation ensured 13. Quoted in Evans, The Forging of the Modern State,
its growth and domination of the Western world. p. 124.
The Industrial Revolution seemed to prove to
Europeans the underlying assumption of the Scientific SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING LLLL
Revolution of the seventeenth century—that human
beings were capable of dominating nature. By ration- The well-written work by D. Landes, The Unbound Prometheus:
ally manipulating the material environment for human Technological Change and Industrial Development in Western
benefit, people could create new levels of material pros- Europe from 1750 to the Present (Cambridge, 1969), is a good
introduction to the Industrial Revolution. Although more tech-
perity and produce machines not dreamed of in their
nical, also of value are C. Trebilcock, The Industrialization of
wildest imaginings. Lost in the excitement of the Indus-
the Continental Powers, 1780–1914 (London, 1981); and
trial Revolution were the voices that pointed to the
S. Pollard, Peaceful Conquest: The Industrialization of Europe,
dehumanization of the workforce and the alienation 1760–1970 (Oxford, 1981). There are good collections of
from one’s work, one’s associates, one’s self, and the essays in P. Mathias and J. A. Davis, eds., The First Industrial
natural world. Revolutions(Oxford, 1989); and M. Teich and R. Porter, eds.,
The Industrial Revolution in National Context: Europe and the
The Industrial Revolution also transformed the
USA(Cambridge, 1996). See also D. Fisher, The Industrial
social world of Europe. The creation of an industrial
Revolution(New York, 1992). For a broader perspective, see
proletariat produced a whole new force for change. The P. Stearns, The Industrial Revolution in World History(Boulder,
development of a wealthy industrial middle class pre- Colo., 1993). Although older and dated, T. S. Ashton, The
sented a challenge to the long-term hegemony of Industrial Revolution, 1760–1830(New York, 1948) still pro-
vides an interesting introduction to the Industrial Revolution in
landed wealth. Though that wealth had been threat-
Britain. Much better, however, are P. Mathias, The First Indus-
ened by the fortunes of commerce, it had never been
trial Nation: An Economic History of Britain, 1700–1914, 2d ed.
overturned. But the new bourgeoisie was more demand-
(New York, 1983); and R. Brown, Society and Economy in
ing. How, in some places, this new industrial bour- Modern Britain, 1700–1850(London, 1991). On the spread of
geoisie came to play a larger role in the affairs of state industrialization to the Continent, see A. Milward and S. B.
will become evident in the next chapter. Saul, The Development of the Economies of Continental Europe
(Oxford, 1977); and T. Kemp, Industrialization in Nineteenth-
Century Europe,2d ed. (London, 1985).
Given the importance of Great Britain in the Industrial
NOTES LLLLLLLLLLLLLLL
Revolution, a number of books are available that place the
Industrial Revolution in Britain in a broader context. See E. J.
1. Quoted in W. Gorden Rimmer, Marshall’s of Leeds, Flax- Evans, The Forging of the Modern State: Early Industrial Britain,
Spinners 1788–1886(Cambridge, 1960), p. 40. 1783–1870 (London, 1983); S. Checkland, British Public Policy,
2. Daniel Defoe, A Plan of the English Commerce(Oxford, 1776–1939: An Economic, Social and Political Perspective
1928), pp. 76–77. (Cambridge, 1983); and P. K. O’Brien and R. Quinault, eds.,
3. Quoted in David Landes, The Unbound Prometheus: The Industrial Revolution and British Society(New York, 1993).
Technological Change and Industrial Development in The early industrialization of the United States is exam-
Western Europe from 1750 to the Present(Cambridge, ined in B. Hindle and S. Lubar, Engines of Change: The Ameri-
1969), pp. 99–100. can Industrial Revolution, 1790–1860(Washington, D.C.,
4. Quoted in Albert Tucker, A History of English Civilization 1986). On the economic ties between Great Britain and the
(New York, 1972), p. 583. United States, see D. Jeremy, Transatlantic Industrial Revolu-
5. Quoted in Landes, The Unbound Prometheus, tion: The Diffusion of Textile Technology between Britain and
pp. 149–150. America, 1790–1830 (Cambridge, Mass., 1981).
6. Quotations can be found in E. Royston Pike, Human A general discussion of population growth in Europe can
Documents of the Industrial Revolution in Britain be found in T. McKeown, The Modern Rise of Population (Lon-
(London, 1966), pp. (in order of quotations) 320, 313, don, 1976). For an examination of urban growth, see the older
314, 343. but classic work of A. F. Weber, The Growth of Cities in the
7. Ibid., p. 315. Nineteenth Century: A Study in Statistics(Ithaca, N.Y., 1963);
8. Quoted in A. J. Donajgrodzi, ed., Social Control in Nine- A. R. Sutcliffe, Towards the Planned City: Germany, Britain, the
teenth Century Britain(London, 1977), p. 141. United States and France, 1780–1914(Oxford, 1981); and L. D.
9. Quoted in Pike, Human Documents of the Industrial Schwarz, London in the Age of Industrialization(New York,
Revolution in Britain,pp. 343–344. 1992). C. Kinealy, A Death-Dealing Famine: The Great Hunger
The Industrial Revolution and Its Impact on European Society 607
in Ireland(Chicago, 1997) is a good account of the great Irish Minn., 1990); and L. L. Frader, “Doing Capitalism’s Work:
tragedy. Many of the works cited above have much information Women in the Western European Industrial Economy,” in
on the social impact of the Industrial Revolution, but addi- R. Bridenthal, S. M. Stuard, and M. E. Wiesner, eds., Becoming
tional material is available in F. Crouzet, The First Industrial- Visible,3d ed. (Boston, 1998).
ists: The Problems of Origins (Cambridge, 1985), on British
entrepreneurs; J. Merriman, The Margins of City Life(New
York, 1991), on French cities; P. Pilbeam, The Middle Classes
in Europe, 1789–1914(Basingstoke, 1990); and T. Koditschek,
For additional reading, go to InfoTrac
Class Formation and Urban Industrial Society(New York,
College Edition, your online research
1990). G. Himmelfarb, The Idea of Poverty: England in the
library at http://web1.infotrac-college.com
Early Industrial Age(New York, 1984) traces the concepts of
poverty and poor from the mid-eighteenth century to the mid- Enter the search terms industrial revolutionusing Key Terms.
nineteenth century. A classic work on female labor patterns is
Enter the search terms industrial developmentusing the Subject
L. A. Tilly and J. W. Scott, Women, Work, and Family(New
Guide.
York, 1978). See also J. Lown, Women and Industrialization:
Gender at Work in Nineteenth-Century England (Minneapolis, Enter the search term Chartismusing the Subject Guide.
608 CHAPTER 20