a branch campus in the Middle East, Carnegie Mellon University in Qatar , which offers
a full undergraduate curriculum with degree programs in computer science, business
administration, biology, computational biology, and information systems. The campus
is located in Doha 's Education City which is home to multiple other U. S. universities
all of which are funded by the Qatar Foundation . The Qatari campus has been the subject
of controversy, as Islamic cultural values and laws in Qatar differ greatly from the
core values of Carnegie Mellon. [ 124 ] Additionally, Carnegie Mellon and other U.
S. universities in Education City have been criticized for being essentially complicit
in Qatar's corruption, connections with Hamas and their questionable human rights
record by continuing to operate there. [ 124 ] [ 125 ] [ 126 ] [ 127 ] It also has
graduate-level extension campuses in Mountain View, California in the heart of Silicon
Valley (offering masters programs in Software Engineering and Software Management).
The Tepper School of Business maintains a satellite center in downtown Manhattan and
the Heinz College maintains one in Adelaide , Australia. The Heinz College , the Institute
for Politics and Strategy, and the Department of Engineering and Public Policy host
centers in Washington, D. C. as part of degree programs, research, and government
affairs initiatives as well as being a part of the University of California, Washington
Center . Carnegie Mellon also established the Integrative Media Program at Steiner
Studios in Brooklyn , New York. Carnegie Mellon also maintains the Carnegie Mellon
Los Angeles Center in North Hollywood, California where students in the Master of
Entertainment Industry Management program are required to relocate to Los Angeles
in their second year and attend classes at this facility. Carnegie Mellon's Information
Networking Institute offers graduate programs in Athens, Greece and Kobe, Japan ,
in collaboration with Athens Information Technology and the Hyogo Institute of Information
Education Foundation, respectively. In the fall of 2007, the cities of Aveiro and
Lisbon , Portugal were added to the Information Networking Institute 's remote locations.
The Software and Societal Systems Department (S3D) offers graduate programs in Coimbra
, Portugal. The Entertainment Technology Center offers graduate programs in Portugal,
Japan, and Singapore. The Human–Computer Interaction Institute offers a master's degree
in conjunction with the University of Madeira , in Portugal at the jointly founded
Madeira Interactive Technologies Institute . The College of Engineering has an international
location in Kigali, Rwanda offering the Master of Science in Information Technology
and the Master of Science in Electrical and Computer Engineering. The Libraries of
Carnegie Mellon include Hunt Library, the Roger Sorrells Engineering & Science Library,
the Mellon Institute Library, the Posner Center, and the Qatar Library. Additionally,
the Libraries' Million Book Project (2001–2008) sparked development of the Universal
Digital Library . The university libraries host a number of full text special collections
for public access, including the Andrew Carnegie Collection, Herbert A. Simon Collection,