Street remained opened – This lessened the traffic in the residential area *More efficient
trash collection – The goal is to have Liberty Avenue completely cleaned and all tents
out by Sunday evening. We have video to show success with these efforts. *Better traffic
flow and signage. Over 100 detours signs are put up, and all road closures and detours
are posted on www. Littleitalydays. com. Furthermore, we do not have any control over
local residents and businesses that advertise their private parking spaces for profit.
Signs directing traffic to these spaces are conflicting to our traffic flow plan,
and confusing for festival attendees. Any time these signs are noticed, they are removed
by our staff immediately. Additionally, the following improvements have been made
over the past five years. *Additional seating *More police presence and safety measures
*On site paramedics *Established emergency plans *Changed the ending time from 10:
00pm to 9: 00pm and Sunday from 7: 00pm to 6: 00pm *Free Shuttle Services – Partnership
obtained with UPMC for the Luna Garage Employee parking lot with 1000 available spaces.
Over 100 are signs are posted publicizing free parking, along with social media promotions.
*Partnerships with Uber and Lyft to provide alternative transportation to the festival
*Regular meetings with City of Pittsburgh and Port Authority. * Designated bike parking
space at West Penn Lot and share the lane signs on Liberty Avenue on Thursday and
Friday, through communication with Bloomfield Livable Streets. Bicycle Parking Share
the Road Sign Open Bike Lane Share the Road Sign CURRENT PARTICIPATION During the
2019 festival, Little Italy Days staff interviewed businesses and many of them expressed
support of the festival. (see youtube video). Several Bloomfield institutions are
also sponsors including Highmark/Allegheny Health Network (West Penn Hospital) – Official
Sponsor, UPMC, Rohrich Honda, First Commonwealth Bank, First National Bank, WesBanco,
and PNC Bank. Both Highmark and UPMC have mobile units present during the festival
for community outreach. Line at Angelo’s COMMUNITY OUTREACH Bloomfield currently has
four active non-profit organizations that we communicate with regularly: Bloomfield
Business Network (BBN) – The Bloomfield Business Network is a membership based community
organization that strives to promote local businesses in the Liberty Avenue, Baum
Boulevard, and Main Street corridors by maintaining the community’s image and offering
resources to sustain the neighborhood in the present and the future. (Mission) Bloomfield
Citizens Council (BCC) – Represents the Citizens of Bloomfield. Bloomfield Development
Corporation (BDC) – Focuses mainly on community engagement with development, and other
issues, and hosts meetings related to specific issues. The mission of the Bloomfield
Development Corporation is to build a thriving, diverse community through equitable
engagement. Bloomfield Livable Streets (BLS) - advocates for infrastructural enhancements
that promote accessibility and safety for all users of Bloomfield streets. The Bloomfield
Business Network and The Bloomfield Citizens Council have given their total support
to the festival organization, and Mr. Richetti keeps open communication line with
all community groups throughout the year. We are always open to listening to the community