led by New York University with a consortium of universities including Carnegie Mellon,
the University of Warwick , the City University of New York , the Indian Institute
of Technology Bombay , and the University of Toronto . On February 5, 2013, Carnegie
Mellon announced the selection of Subra Suresh , Director of the National Science
Foundation and Dean of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology School of Engineering
, as its ninth president effective July 1, 2013. [ 27 ] Suresh stepped down in June
2017 [ 28 ] and was replaced by Farnam Jahanian , the university's interim-president
and former provost, in March 2018. [ 29 ] On October 30, 2019, Carnegie Mellon publicly
announced the launch of "Make Possible: The Campaign for Carnegie Mellon University",
a campaign which seeks to raise $2 billion to advance the university's priorities,
including campus development. [ 30 ] On September 8, 2022, Carnegie Mellon announced
a $275. 7 million partnership with the Mastercard Foundation to support Carnegie Mellon
University Africa in Kigali, Rwanda . Carnegie Mellon's Kigali campus provides graduate-level
study in engineering and artificial intelligence. On November 6, 2023, Carnegie Mellon
Trustee Ray Lane and his wife Stephanie Lane invested $25 million in support of the
university's Computational Biology department. [ 31 ] Carnegie Mellon's 157. 2 acre
(63 ha) main campus is five miles (8 km) from downtown Pittsburgh , between Schenley
Park and the neighborhoods of Squirrel Hill , Shadyside , and Oakland . [ 5 ] Carnegie
Mellon is bordered to the west by the campus of the University of Pittsburgh . Carnegie
Mellon owns 81 buildings in the Oakland and Squirrel Hill neighborhoods of Pittsburgh.
For decades, the center of student life on campus was Skibo Hall, the university's
student union. Built in the 1950s, Skibo Hall's design was typical of mid-century
modern architecture but was poorly equipped to deal with advances in computer and
internet connectivity. The original Skibo Hall was razed in the summer of 1994 and
replaced by a new student union that is fully Wi-Fi enabled. Known as the University
Center, the building was dedicated in 1996. In 2014, Carnegie Mellon re-dedicated
the University Center as the Cohon University Center in recognition of the eighth
president of the university, Jared Cohon . [ 32 ] A large grassy area known as "The
Cut" forms the backbone of the campus, with a separate grassy area known as "The Mall"
running perpendicular. The Cut was formed by filling in a ravine (hence the name)
with soil from a nearby hill that was leveled to build the College of Fine Arts building.
The northwestern part of the campus (home to Hamburg Hall, Newell-Simon Hall, Smith
Hall, and Gates Hillman Complex) was acquired from the United States Bureau of Mines
in the 1980s. Carnegie Mellon has been purchasing 100% renewable energy for its electricity
since 2011. [ 33 ] [ additional citation(s) needed ] A panoramic view of Carnegie