the Oakland Civic Center/Schenley Farms National Historic District . [ 33 ] contains
an eclectic mix of architecture that includes Greek revival, Neogothic, Italian Renaissance,
and modern. [ citation needed ] It has been termed "a theme park of replica buildings,
representing the architecture of the past speaking to the present. " [ 34 ] The University
of Pittsburgh's main campus contains four contiguous sections: upper (sports complexes,
residence halls ); mid ( Benedum , Chevron , Allen and Thaw Halls ); lower ( Cathedral
of Learning , Union , Posvar Hall ); and on the west end of campus, the medical center
complex . The campus is bordered by Darragh Street/McKee Place to the west and Bellefield
Avenue/Dithridge Street to the east; Forbes and Fifth avenues traverse the campus
from west to east. Although generally within walking distance, the university also
runs a bus and shuttle service between various campus locations and bordering neighborhoods.
[ 35 ] The main campus is within walking distance of many recreational, cultural,
and educational institutions in the Oakland neighborhood. The campus is adjacent to
Schenley Plaza , the main branch of the Carnegie Public Library , the Carnegie Museums
of Natural History and Art and the Carnegie Music Hall, as well as portions of Carnegie
Mellon University . Carlow University is just west of campus, adjacent to the university's
medical center complexes. The main quad of Carnegie Mellon University , Central Catholic
High School , and historic Schenley Park , site of the Phipps Conservatory & Botanical
Gardens , lie across Junction Hollow on the east end. Four Pitt buildings are individually
listed on the National Register of Historic Places : Allegheny Observatory (in Pittsburgh's
Riverview Park on the Northside ), the Cathedral of Learning , [ 36 ] the Pittsburgh
Athletic Association building, and the Ford Motor building . Twenty-one of Pitt's
buildings (including the 5 residence halls that make up Schenley Quadrangle , see
below) are contributing properties to the Schenley Farms-Oakland Civic Center Historic
District that has been listed on the National Register of Historic Places as a historic
district . [ 33 ] Due to the historical nature of various sites around Pitt's buildings,
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has placed historical markers outside the Allegheny
Observatory , [ 37 ] Posvar Hall , [ 38 ] [ 39 ] Salk Hall , [ 40 ] Stephen Foster
Memorial , [ 41 ] and the William Pitt Union . [ 42 ] In addition, a Pennsylvania
Historical Marker has been placed on campus near the Cathedral of Learning to mark
the significance of the University of Pittsburgh itself. [ 43 ] In addition, the Pittsburgh
History and Landmarks Foundation has designated the following Pitt buildings as Pittsburgh
Historic Landmarks: Allegheny Observatory , Allen Hall , Alumni Hall , Bellefield
Hall , Chancellor's Residence , Cathedral of Learning , the Cathedral of Learning
interior rooms , Gardner Steel Conference Center , Heinz Memorial Chapel , Thaw Hall