the street to set up a tent for their activities. The Bloomfield Citizens Council
and Bloomfield Business Network take advantage of this and are visible on the avenue
for the entire festival. *Every community group gets their name printed in the Little
Italy Days Souvenir Program Book *Every year community meetings are held to update
the community on activities and street closings. This information is also always available
on www. littleitalydays. com and social media. *A non-profit entity, Liberty 24 was
created to support the community and the business district through Little Italy Days
and other events. *Promotion of local businesses on KDKA 1020 live radio with host
Rob Pratt and Larry Richert on live radio broadcast. *Promotion of local businesses
on KDKA TV Pittsburgh Today Live Television - Every year three local businesses participate.
*Dave Crawley special reports on KDKA; 2 businesses were featured *One month prior
to festival, over 200 press releases are sent to media outlets promoting Bloomfield
and the festival *One week prior to the festival we hold a press conference hosted
by Paul Martino, from KDKA TV, and other local TV Stations, and invite community groups.
*Social media campaign on WPXI featuring the festival and businesses of Bloomfield.
*Opening day (Thursday), KDKA Radio host Marty Griffin did a live remote from 2: 00
p. m. to 6: 00 p. m. in front of The Pleasure Bar, with featured local businesses,
branding Bloomfield for the entire four-hour broadcast. *Ads are placed in the Post-Gazette
promoting the festival and Bloomfield. *Facilitated and brought Anthony Bourdain host
of national TV show Parts Unknown to Bloomfield to film an episode that aired in 2016
season *Promoted and paid three bands to perform on Liberty Avenue for the community
to enjoy IMPROVEMENTS In 2015 the following changes were made: *Taylor Street remained
opened – This lessened the traffic in the residential area *More efficient trash collection
– The goal is to have Liberty Avenue completely cleaned and all tents out by Sunday
evening. We have video to show success with these efforts. *Better traffic flow and
signage. Over 100 detours signs are put up, and all road closures and detours are
posted on www. Littleitalydays. com. Furthermore, we do not have any control over
local residents and businesses that advertise their private parking spaces for profit.
Signs directing traffic to these spaces are conflicting to our traffic flow plan,
and confusing for festival attendees. Any time these signs are noticed, they are removed
by our staff immediately. Additionally, the following improvements have been made
over the past five years. *Additional seating *More police presence and safety measures
*On site paramedics *Established emergency plans *Changed the ending time from 10:
00pm to 9: 00pm and Sunday from 7: 00pm to 6: 00pm *Free Shuttle Services – Partnership
obtained with UPMC for the Luna Garage Employee parking lot with 1000 available spaces.
Over 100 are signs are posted publicizing free parking, along with social media promotions.