and worldview Carnegie and his family belonged to the Presbyterian Church in the United
States of America , also known informally as the Northern Presbyterian Church. In
his early life Carnegie was skeptical of Calvinism , and religion as a whole, but
reconciled with it later in his life. In his autobiography, Carnegie describes his
family as moderate Presbyterian believers, writing that "there was not one orthodox
Presbyterian" in his family; various members of his family having somewhat distanced
themselves from Calvinism, some of them leaning more towards Swedenborgianism . While
a child, his family led vigorous theological and political disputes. His mother avoided
the topic of religion. His father left the Presbyterian church after a sermon on infant
damnation, while, according to Carnegie, still remaining very religious on his own.
Witnessing sectarianism and strife in 19th century Scotland regarding religion and
philosophy, Carnegie kept his distance from organized religion and theism. [ 128 ]
Carnegie instead preferred to see things through naturalistic and scientific terms
stating, "Not only had I got rid of the theology and the supernatural, but I had found
the truth of evolution. " [ 129 ] Later in life, Carnegie's firm opposition to religion
softened. For many years he was a member of Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church , pastored
from 1905 to 1926 by Social Gospel exponent Henry Sloane Coffin , while his wife and
daughter belonged to the Brick Presbyterian Church . [ 130 ] He also prepared (but
did not deliver) an address in which he professed a belief in "an Infinite and Eternal
Energy from which all things proceed". [ 131 ] Records exist of a short period of
correspondence around 1912–1913 between Carnegie and 'Abdu'l-Bahá , the eldest son
of Bahá'u'lláh , founder of the Baháʼí Faith . In these letters, one of which was
published in The New York Times in full text, [ 132 ] Carnegie is extolled as a "lover
of the world of humanity and one of the founders of Universal Peace". World peace
Influenced by his "favorite living hero in public life", John Bright , Carnegie started
his efforts in pursuit of world peace at a young age, [ 134 ] and he supported causes
that opposed military intervention . [ 135 ] His motto, "All is well since all grows
better", served not only as a good rationalization of his successful business career
but also his view of international relations. Despite his efforts towards international
peace, Carnegie faced many dilemmas on his quest. These dilemmas are often regarded
as conflicts between his view on international relations and his other loyalties.
Throughout the 1880s and 1890s, for example, Carnegie allowed his steel works to fill
large orders of armor plate for the building of an enlarged and modernized United
States Navy, but he opposed American overseas expansion. [ 136 ] Despite that, Carnegie
served as a major donor for the newly established International Court of Arbitration