Pittsburgh in 1803 when Meriwether Lewis purchased a keelboat that would later be
used to ascend the Missouri River . [ 39 ] The War of 1812 cut off the supply of British
goods, stimulating American industry. By 1815, Pittsburgh was producing significant
quantities of iron, brass, tin, and glass. On March 18, 1816, the 46-year-old local
government became a city. It was served by numerous river steamboats that increased
trading traffic on the rivers. In the 1830s, many Welsh people from the Merthyr steelworks
immigrated to the city following the aftermath of the Merthyr Rising . By the 1840s,
Pittsburgh was one of the largest cities west of the Allegheny Mountains . The Great
Fire of Pittsburgh destroyed over a thousand buildings in 1845. The city rebuilt with
the aid of Irish immigrants who came to escape the Great Famine . By 1857, Pittsburgh's
1, 000 factories were consuming 22 million coal bushels yearly. Coal mining and iron
manufacturing attracted waves of European immigrants to the area, with the most coming
from Germany . Because Pennsylvania had been established as a free state after the
Revolution, enslaved African Americans sought freedom here through escape as refugees
from the South, or occasionally fleeing from travelers they were serving who stayed
in the city. There were active stations of the Underground Railroad in the city, and
numerous refugees were documented as getting help from station agents and African-American
workers in city hotels. The Drennen Slave Girl walked out of the Monongahela House
in 1850, apparently to freedom. [ 40 ] The Merchant's Hotel was also a place where
African-American workers would advise slaves the state was free and aid them in getting
to nearby stations of the Underground Railroad. [ 41 ] Sometimes refugee slaves from
the South stayed in Pittsburgh, but other times they continued North, including into
Canada. Many slaves left the city and county for Canada after Congress passed the
1850 Fugitive Slave Act , as it required cooperation from law enforcement even in
free states and increased penalties. From 1850 to 1860, the black population in Allegheny
County dropped from 3, 431 to 2, 725 as people headed to more safety in Canada. [
40 ] The American Civil War boosted the city's economy with increased iron and armament
demand by the Union. Andrew Carnegie began steel production in 1875 at the Edgar Thomson
Steel Works in North Braddock, Pennsylvania , which evolved into the Carnegie Steel
Company . He adopted the Bessemer process to increase production. Manufacturing was
key to growth of Pittsburgh and the surrounding region. Railroad lines were built
into the city along both rivers, increasing transportation access to important markets.
An aerial view of Pittsburgh in 1902 In 1901, J. P. Morgan and attorney Elbert H.
Gary merged Carnegie Steel Company and several other companies into U. S. Steel .
By 1910, Pittsburgh was the nation's eighth-largest city , accounting for between