and Hunting Club. Less than 20 miles (32 km) downstream from the dam sat the city
of Johnstown. The dam was 72 feet (22 m) high and 931 feet (284 m) long. Between 1881,
when the club was opened, and 1889, the dam frequently sprang leaks and was patched,
mostly with mud and straw. Additionally, a previous owner removed and sold for scrap
the three cast iron discharge pipes that previously allowed a controlled release of
water. There had been some speculation as to the dam's integrity, and concerns had
been raised by the head of the Cambria Iron Works downstream in Johnstown. Such repair
work, a reduction in height, and unusually high snowmelt and heavy spring rains combined
to cause the dam to give way on May 31, 1889, resulting in twenty million tons of
water sweeping down the valley as the Johnstown Flood. [ 82 ] When word of the dam's
failure was telegraphed to Pittsburgh, Frick and other members of the South Fork Fishing
and Hunting Club gathered to form the Pittsburgh Relief Committee for assistance to
the flood victims as well as determining never to speak publicly about the club or
the flood. This strategy was a success, and Knox and Reed were able to fend off all
lawsuits that would have placed blame upon the club's members. Although Cambria Iron
and Steel's facilities were heavily damaged by the flood, they returned to full production
within a year. After the flood, Carnegie built Johnstown a new library to replace
the one built by Cambria's chief legal counsel Cyrus Elder, which was destroyed in
the flood. The Carnegie-donated library is now owned by the Johnstown Area Heritage
Association and houses the Flood Museum. 1892: Homestead Strike The Homestead Strike
was a bloody labor confrontation lasting 143 days in 1892, one of the most serious
in U. S. history. The conflict was centered on Carnegie Steel's main plant in Homestead,
Pennsylvania , and grew out of a labor dispute between the Amalgamated Association
of Iron and Steel Workers (AA) and the Carnegie Steel Company . Carnegie left on a
trip to Scotland before the unrest peaked. [ 83 ] In doing so, Carnegie left mediation
of the dispute in the hands of his associate and partner Henry Clay Frick . Frick
was well known in industrial circles for maintaining staunch anti-union sentiment.
With the collective bargaining agreement between the union and company expiring at
the end of June, Frick and the leaders of the local AA union entered into negotiations
in February. With the steel industry doing well and prices higher, the AA asked for
a wage increase; the AA represented about 800 of the 3, 800 workers at the plant.
Frick immediately countered with an average 22% wage decrease that would affect nearly
half the union's membership and remove a number of positions from the bargaining unit.
[ 84 ] The union and company failed to come to an agreement, and management locked