rock group Modey Lemon toured the U. S. and internationally, gaining favorable reviews.
Singer Christina Aguilera , a student at North Allegheny Intermediate High School
, debuted locally at the 1999 Lilith Fair , before going on to sell over 43 million
albums worldwide. [ 8 ] In the 2000s, Anti-Flag produced five albums, signed to RCA
Records and appeared several times on the Vans Warped Tour . Rapper Wiz Khalifa ,
who signed to Warner Bros. Records but left without releasing an album, topped the
iTunes singles chart by the end of the decade. Mashup /laptop music artist Girl Talk
(Gregg Gillis) found mainstream success. His 2006 album Night Ripper gained favorable
reviews and Feed the Animals (2008) topped year end album lists in national media.
[ 8 ] Since 2010, solo acts such as natives Jackie Evancho , Slimmie Hendrix , Wiz
Khalifa , Daya , and Mac Miller have achieved worldwide fame. Josh Groban was trained
in Pittsburgh, having attended Carnegie Mellon University . While it has historically
been overshadowed by other regional scenes, Pittsburgh's Hardcore/Metal scene has
gained international attention since the mid 2010s, as witnessed by the critical and
commercial success of the band Code Orange . Other popular metal bands from Pittsburgh
include Signs Of The Swarm and Those Who Fear. In the late 2010s and 2020s, many Pittsburgh-based
bands involved in the city's local music scene rose to nationwide prominence, including
Feeble Little Horse , Short Fictions , and Merce Lemon . This period of time has been
marked by an uptick in shoegaze , noise rock , emo , and slowcore music coming from
within the local scene, as well. [ 9 ] Pittsburgh Dance Council and the Pittsburgh
Ballet Theater host a variety of dance events. Polka, folk, square and round dancing
have a long history in the city and are celebrated by the internationally famous Duquesne
University Tamburitzans , a multicultural academy dedicated to the preservation and
presentation of folk songs and dance. Pittsburgh has several visual arts museums,
including the Andy Warhol Museum , dedicated to the works of Pittsburgh native Andy
Warhol . The Carnegie Museum of Art is home to works by artists including Edgar Degas
, Vincent van Gogh , Claude Monet and Robert Adam , along with galleries of sculpture,
modern art, the Heinz Architectural Center, a large film and video collection, and
various traveling exhibits. Installation art is featured outdoors at ArtGardens of
Pittsburgh. The Pittsburgh Center for the Arts shows contemporary art and provides
resources for Western Pennsylvania artists. The town's history museum is the Heinz
History Center with an annual attendance of 130, 000. The Carnegie Museum of Natural
History , located in Oakland , has extensive dinosaur collections on display, including
the most complete Tyrannosaurus rex skeleton ever discovered, and an Egyptian wing.
The building may be distinguished by a life-size statue known as, " Dippy the Diplodocus