William Pitt Union and the Cathedral of Learning and involve a range of activities,
novelties, and bands. [ 180 ] Related to graduation, there is Honors Convocation,
where awards and recognition are bestowed upon students, faculty, alumni, and staff
throughout the schools and departments of the university. [ 48 ] Also, the "Panther
Sendoff" is a free annual reception typically held in Alumni Hall to congratulate
each year's graduating class and wish them well. [ 181 ] A free event open to the
public, the Nationality Rooms Open House occurs on a Sunday in early December each
year in the Cathedral of Learning and involves the presentation of the rooms decorated
in traditional holiday styles, day-long performances of dance and song by various
ethnic groups, and food and crafts from many of the nationality room's committees.
[ 182 ] Traditions related to athletics include the "Victory Lights", where golden
flood lights illuminate the top of the Cathedral of Learning after every football
victory and select other athletic achievements. [ 183 ] [ 184 ] [ 185 ] The Annual
Bonfire and Pep Rally which is hosted by the Pitt Program Council and is held prior
to a select football game. Held on the lawn of the Cathedral of Learning , it often
involves the band, cheerleaders, football team, visiting dignitaries, and giveaways.
[ 183 ] [ 186 ] Homecoming, which revolves around another home football game each
year, includes a traditional fireworks and a laser-light display between the William
Pitt Union and the Cathedral of Learning . [ 187 ] The Varsity Walk, a walkway between
the Cathedral of Learning and Heinz Memorial Chapel , is carved each year the names
of former Pitt athletes (each year since 1950) who have promoted the university through
their athletic (Panther Award) or academic (Blue-Gold Award) achievements. [ 188 ]
"Greek Week" is a yearlong initiative for the Greek organizations on campus to raise
money for different charitable organizations through different events. The two biggest
events each year are the Pitt Dance Marathon and Greek Sing. Yearlong fundraising
activities are also held to support such charitable organizations such as the Ronald
McDonald House , Make a Wish Foundation , University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute
, and the Pittsburgh Food Bank. [ 189 ] "E-Week" is a spring celebration organized
by the Engineer Student Council for a week-long series of activities and competitions
to demonstrate engineering skills and foster a spirit of camaraderie. Activities include
games such as Monopoly, Ingenuity, Jeopardy, Assassins, and include a talent show,
relay race, mini-Olympics, and blood drive. The festivities reach climax with a parade
on Friday, a soapbox derby on Saturday, and the "e-ball finale" on Saturday evening.
Each year, a unique theme is chosen. Each engineering department competes against
the others, while some smaller departments join forces. [ 190 ] [ 191 ] Pitt Arts
is a program founded by the university in 1997 to encourage students to explore and