the roots of the community as displayed in the “Welcome to Bloomfield, Pittsburgh’s
Little Italy Sign”, while following the progression of the business district and embracing
the diversity. The festival still has a large Italian representation and includes
many Italian Vendors, Italian Bocce Tournament (24 Teams), an Italian Mass and Procession,
three stages of Italian Themed Entertainment, Little Miss Italy Contest, Italian Cooking
Shows, Italian Dance Groups, Italian Idol Singing Competition, Italian Music and Opera,
Italian Wine and Cooking Demonstrations, as well as an abundance of Italian Foods,
Desserts, Italian T Shirts, Trinkets, and Crafts. The bocce tournament is a huge draw
with the Italian Team, led by Mayor Peduto playing against the Irish Team, led by
County Executive Rich Fitzgerald. There are many other local media and sports celebrities
who attend this tournament. Our surveys and interviews with Liberty Avenue businesses
prove that Little Italy Days still significantly increases the revenue for most of
the local businesses over the four-day period like no other time of the year. We do
recognize that certain businesses choose to close, and many of them do for other events
including the Halloween Parade, the Columbus Day Parade and the Pittsburgh Marathon.
This is not interpreted as negative to the festival, as there are other reasons for
closing such as lack of staffing, vacation, family commitments or renovations. The
following Bloomfield restaurants and businesses are on record of being fully supportive
– Highmark, Allegheny Health Network (Official Sponsor), UPMC, Rohrich Honda, Mini
of Pittsburgh (both of whom display their vehicles at the festival), Little Lou’s
Bar, Spill the Wine, Paddy Cake Bakery, Rocky’s, Azorean Café, Donatelli’s, Lot 17,
Froggy’s, Station, Angelo’s, Merante’s, Calientes, Sausalido’s, Lombardozzi’s, Commonwealth
Press, Flower Printing, Alexander’s, Tessaros, APlus Mini Mart, Howlers, The Iron
Lung, Smokin Brews, and The Pleasure Bar. Caliente’s had seven spaces in 2019, and
most other restaurants and bars had two spaces. State Farm Insurance also took advantage
of Little Italy Days attendees by bringing in their corporate headquarters to gather
email addresses and potential new customers. Oriental Massage was giving free neck
massages and specials for the weekend. These are examples of what all businesses can
do during the festival to get more customers. Commonwealth Press, Flower Printing,
Froggy’s Azorean Café, Spill the Wine, Iron Lung, Smokin Brews and Fudge Farm are
eight new businesses on Liberty Avenue that have been able to better promote their
businesses to the many festival attendees. The following are a few quotes from Bloomfield
Businesses. (These and all the information are available on the supporting videos)
Caliente – Nick Bogacz “We pay our taxes with this money” “My family depends on this”
Merante’s – Maria Merante “We do one month’s worth of business in four days. ” Lot
17 – Dave Namestnk – “It’s great exposure” Paddy Cake Bakery – Patrick Connolly –
“Where can you have a business where 20, 000 come to your front door to try your product?