largest research programs. [ 15 ] Pitt is known for the Kenneth P. Dietrich School
of Arts and Sciences , University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public and International
Affairs , University of Pittsburgh School of Information Sciences , Swanson School
of Engineering , University of Pittsburgh College of Business Administration , University
of Pittsburgh School of Law , University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine , University
of Pittsburgh School of Social Work , and other biomedical and health-related sciences.
[ 227 ] [ 228 ] [ 229 ] [ 230 ] [ 231 ] Carlow University is a small private Catholic
university that while coeducational, has traditionally educated women. Chatham University
, a liberal arts college that was founded as a woman's college but became fully coeducational
in 2015, [ 232 ] is in the Shadyside neighborhood, but also maintains a 388-acre (157
ha) Eden Hall Farm campus in the North Hills . Duquesne University , a private Catholic
university in the Bluff neighborhood and is noted for its song and dance troupe, the
Duquesne University Tamburitzans , as well as programs in law, business, and pharmacy.
Point Park University was founded in 1961 and is well known for its Conservatory of
Performing Arts and its Pittsburgh Playhouse . Pittsburgh Public Schools teachers
are paid well relative to their peers, ranking 17th in 2000 among the 100 largest
cities by population for the highest minimum salary. In 2018, the starting teacher
salary offered to teachers with a BA was $46, 920. The maximum annual salary for a
teacher with a master's degree was $95, 254. [ 233 ] Local public schools include
many charter and magnet schools, including City Charter High School (computer and
technology focused), Pittsburgh Montessori School (formerly Homewood Montessori),
Pittsburgh Gifted Center , Barack Obama Academy of International Studies 6-12 , Pittsburgh
Creative and Performing Arts 6–12 , Pittsburgh Science and Technology Academy , the
Western Pennsylvania School for Blind Children , and the Western Pennsylvania School
for the Deaf . Private schools in Pittsburgh include Bishop Canevin High School ,
Central Catholic High School , Oakland Catholic High School , Winchester Thurston
School , St. Edmund's Academy , Hillel Academy of Pittsburgh, Yeshiva Schools and
The Ellis School . Shady Side Academy maintains a PK–5 primary school campus in the
Point Breeze neighborhood, in addition to its 6–12 middle and upper school campuses
in nearby suburban Fox Chapel . Other private institutions outside of Pittsburgh's
limits include North Catholic High School and Seton-La Salle Catholic High School
. The city also has an extensive library system, both public and university. Most
notable are the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh and the University of Pittsburgh 's
University Library System, which rank as the ninth-largest public and 18th-largest
academic libraries in the nation, respectively. [ 234 ] [ 235 ] There are two major
daily newspapers in Pittsburgh: the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette and the Pittsburgh Tribune-Review