LITTLE ITALY DAYS COMMUNITY REPORT OCTOBER 2019 Celebrating our roots & Supporting
Bloomfield businesses BY: Sal Richetti, Event Producer Little Italy Days, Inc. ™ EXECUTIVE
SUMMARY We are pleased to present this comprehensive report to the community from
the promoter of Little Italy Days. Its purpose is to provide transparency regarding
the history and current activities of Little Italy Days. This report, along with supporting
videos will be available on www. littleitalydays. com, and accessible to any individual
or organization. HISTORY Little Italy Days was started in 2002 by the Bloomfield Business
Association (BBA) as a way of promoting the local businesses. Over the years the attendance
at the festival grew, gaining national recognition and being awarded “Best City Event,
Best State Event and Best Food Festival. The BBA went inactive in 2008, and the festival
was then promoted by the Bloomfield Development Corporation (BDC) from 2009-2011.
Funds were raised by the BDC and a committee of local stakeholders was involved in
the planning. In June, 2012 reduced funding left the BDC with no staff, and no one
to lead the organization, planning and fundraising for Little Italy Days. Faced with
the possibility of cancelling the festival and realizing the negative impact it would
have on the local businesses, the committee of stakeholders decided to turn the festival
over to Big Day Entertainment, a local, Pittsburgh based business owned by Sal Richetti,
a local businessman and experienced producer of events. Mr. Richetti was born and
raised in Bloomfield, and is a stakeholder, owning property on Gross St. in Bloomfield.
He had been involved in the festival since the first year, booking the entertainment
through his company. Mr. Richetti has produced the festival since 2012, and has worked
diligently to keep the same goal, to increase the bottom line of the local businesses.
He has consistently reached out to the local community groups as partners for the
event, and regularly visits the businesses on Liberty Avenue. A letter of endorsement
was sent by the committee to all Bloomfield Businesses expressing their complete support
of this choice. It would also ensure that Little Italy Days would be a lasting event
when organized and operated by a knowledgeable event planner. CURRENT TEAM MEMBERS
& BIOS Mr. Richetti’s planning efforts are backed by an experienced team that has
previous involvement with Little Italy Days, as well as other events around the tri-state