its remains in the Morrison Formation ( Jurassic ) of Utah . Carnegie was so proud
of "Dippy" that he had casts made of the bones and plaster replicas of the whole skeleton
donated to several museums in Europe and South America. The original fossil skeleton
is assembled and stands in the Hall of Dinosaurs at the Carnegie Museum of Natural
History in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. After the Spanish–American War , Carnegie offered
to donate $20 million to the Philippines so they could buy their independence. Carnegie,
Pennsylvania , [ 155 ] and Carnegie, Oklahoma , were named in his honor. The Saguaro
cactus's scientific name, Carnegiea gigantea , is named after him. The Carnegie Medal
for the best children's literature published in the UK was established in his name.
The Carnegie Faculty of Sport and Education, at Leeds Beckett University , UK, is
named after him. The concert halls in Dunfermline and New York are named after him.
At the height of his career, Carnegie was the second-richest person in the world,
behind only John D. Rockefeller of Standard Oil . Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh
was named after Carnegie, who founded the institution as the Carnegie Technical Schools.
Carnegie Vanguard High School Lauder College (named after his uncle George Lauder
Sr. ) in the Halbeath area of Dunfermline was renamed Carnegie College in 2007. A
street in Belgrade ( Serbia ), next to the Belgrade University Library which is one
of the Carnegie libraries , is named in his honor. An American high school, Carnegie
Vanguard High School in Houston , Texas, is named after him [ 156 ] Carnegie was awarded
the Freedom of the Burgh of Kilmarnock in Scotland in 1903, prior to laying the foundation
stone of Loanhead Public School. [ 157 ] Benefactions According to biographer Burton
J. Hendrick : Hendrick argues that: Research sources Carnegie's personal papers are
at the Library of Congress Manuscript Division. The Carnegie Collections of the Columbia
University Rare Book and Manuscript Library consist of the archives of the following
organizations founded by Carnegie: The Carnegie Corporation of New York (CCNY); The
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace (CEIP); the Carnegie Foundation for the
Advancement of Teaching (CFAT); The Carnegie Council on Ethics and International Affairs
(CCEIA). These collections deal primarily with Carnegie philanthropy and have very
little personal material related to Carnegie. Carnegie Mellon University and the Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh jointly administer the Andrew Carnegie Collection of digitized
archives on Carnegie's life. Moral appraisal By the standards of 19th-century tycoons,
Carnegie was not a particularly ruthless man but a humanitarian with enough acquisitiveness
to go in the ruthless pursuit of money. [ 160 ] "Maybe with the giving away of his
money, " commented biographer Joseph Wall , "he would justify what he had done to
get that money. " [ 161 ] Historian Richard White makes a similar appraisal, writing
that "In disposing of his wealth, Carnegie also sought to justify the existing social