and to encourage other conferences to codify this law. [ 143 ] Legacy and honors In
1899, Andrew Carnegie was awarded American Library Association Honorary Membership
. Carnegie received the honorary Doctor of Laws (DLL) from the University of Glasgow
in June 1901, [ 144 ] and received the Freedom of the City of Glasgow "in recognition
of his munificence" later the same year. [ 145 ] In July 1902, he received the Freedom
of the city of St Andrews , "in testimony of his great zeal for the welfare of his
fellow-men on both sides of the Atlantic", [ 146 ] and in October 1902 the Freedom
of the City of Perth "in testimony of his high personal worth and beneficial influence,
and in recognition of widespread benefactions bestowed on this and other lands, and
especially in gratitude for the endowment granted by him for the promotion of University
education in Scotland. " [ 147 ] and the Freedom of the City of Dundee . [ 148 ] Also
in 1902, he was elected as a member to the American Philosophical Society . [ 149
] He received an honorary Doctor of Laws (LLD) from the University of Aberdeen in
1906. [ 150 ] In 1910, he received the Freedom of the City of Belfast [ 151 ] and
was made as well Commander of the National Order of the Legion of Honour by the French
government. [ 152 ] Carnegie was awarded as Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Orange-Nassau
by Queen Wilhelmina of the Netherlands on August 25, 1913. [ 153 ] Carnegie received
July 1, 1914, an honorary doctorate from the University of Groningen the Netherlands.
[ 154 ] The dinosaur Diplodocus carnegiei (Hatcher) was named for Carnegie after he
sponsored the expedition that discovered its remains in the Morrison Formation ( Jurassic
) of Utah . Carnegie was so proud of "Dippy" that he had casts made of the bones and
plaster replicas of the whole skeleton donated to several museums in Europe and South
America. The original fossil skeleton is assembled and stands in the Hall of Dinosaurs
at the Carnegie Museum of Natural History in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. After the Spanish–American
War , Carnegie offered to donate $20 million to the Philippines so they could buy
their independence. Carnegie, Pennsylvania , [ 155 ] and Carnegie, Oklahoma , were
named in his honor. The Saguaro cactus's scientific name, Carnegiea gigantea , is
named after him. The Carnegie Medal for the best children's literature published in
the UK was established in his name. The Carnegie Faculty of Sport and Education, at
Leeds Beckett University , UK, is named after him. The concert halls in Dunfermline
and New York are named after him. At the height of his career, Carnegie was the second-richest
person in the world, behind only John D. Rockefeller of Standard Oil . Carnegie Mellon
University in Pittsburgh was named after Carnegie, who founded the institution as