in 2023. [ 87 ] In 2020, the university announced a second local renewable power purchasing
agreement, for solar power to be built on the border of Beaver and Allegheny counties
near Pittsburgh International Airport. [ 88 ] The university has been criticized for
some of its financial investments, namely those in the fossil fuel industry. [ 89
] [ 90 ] In 2020, a Board report disclosed that endowment exposure to fossil fuels
had decreased 42% between 2015 and 2020, with zero private investments in fossil fuels
by the end of 2035. [ 91 ] Organization and administration The university was chartered
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in 1787 and it operated as a fully private institution
until an alteration to its charter in 1966 at which point it became part of the Commonwealth
System of Higher Education . This conferred "state-related" status to the university
making it a legal instrument of the Commonwealth which provides an annual financial
appropriation, currently 7. 7% of the university's total operating budget, [ 92 ]
in exchange for the university offering tuition discounts to students who are residents
of Pennsylvania. Legally, however, the university remains a private entity, operating
under its nonprofit corporate charter, governed by its independent Board of Trustees,
and with its assets under its own ownership and control. Therefore, it retains the
freedom and individuality of a private institution, both administratively and academically,
setting its own standards for admissions, awarding of degrees, faculty qualifications,
teaching, and staff hiring. [ b ] The university's board of trustees maintains ultimate
legal authority, governance, and responsibility for the university but specifically
reserves authority over selecting the university's chancellor; approval of major policies,
particularly those related to the fiduciary responsibilities of the board; and the
definition of the university's mission and goals. It is made up of 36 voting members:
chancellor, 17 term trustees elected by the board, 6 alumni trustees elected by the
board on nomination from the Alumni Association Board of directors, and 12 Commonwealth
trustees. The governor of Pennsylvania , the president pro tempore of the Pennsylvania
Senate , and the speaker of the Pennsylvania House of Representatives each appoints
four of the 12 Commonwealth trustees. Additional non-voting trustees include 14 special
trustees and additional emeritus trustees selected by the board. Non-voting ex-officio
members include the governor of Pennsylvania, the secretary of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania , the chief executive of Allegheny County , and the mayor of Pittsburgh
. There are three or more regular meetings of the Board of Trustees per year. The
Board of Trustees selects the university's chancellor, who doubles as the chief academic
officer and the chief executive of the university as well as serving as an ex officio
voting member of the board of trustees. The chancellor is delegated with general administrative,
academic, and management authority over the university. Under the chancellor are the
provost and senior vice chancellor, the senior vice chancellor for health sciences,