was then renamed as the H. John Heinz III School of Public Policy and Management in
honor of Mrs. Heinz's late husband, Senator H. John Heinz III. Senator Heinz, heir
to the H. J. Heinz Company fortune, had been killed when his small private plane crashed
one year before. [ 5 ] In 2007, the Heinz School received a grant from the Heinz Foundations
that transformed the school into a college and formalized the School of Information
Systems & Management alongside the School of Public Policy & Management under the
college's administration. The official launch of the H. John Heinz III College of
Information Systems and Public Policy was held on October 24, 2008 during Carnegie
Mellon's Homecoming weekend and was led by Dean Krishnan, Teresa Heinz, and former
United States Secretary of the Treasury Paul O'Neill . [ 6 ] Heinz College is headquartered
in Hamburg Hall, a building listed on the National Register of Historic Places and
designed by noted Beaux-Arts architect Henry Hornbostel . Hamburg Hall is named for
Lester A. Hamburg, an industrialist and philanthropist active in the Pittsburgh Jewish
Community . [ 7 ] The Heinz College also has a branch campus in Adelaide , South Australia
, which offers master's degrees in Public Policy and Management and Information Technology.
Heinz College also maintains a North Hollywood center in Los Angeles as part of the
jointly administered master's degree program in Entertainment Industry Management,
and a center in Washington, DC on Capitol Hill for students in the Public Policy and
Management masters program. Carnegie Mellon is in the process of renovating and expanding
the Heinz College's Pittsburgh facilities through a four-phased process across Forbes
Avenue from the 2013-announced Tepper Quadrangle. The ultimate plan for Hamburg Hall
is to capture new space – approximately 20, 000 square feet – by enclosing the courtyard
between the rotunda, the East and West Wings, and the adjacent Elliott Dunlap Smith
Hall with a soaring glass roof structure. This new space will include a large, multi‐purpose
Classroom of the Future, lounges, meeting/study space, and a café. Phase I of renovations
and expansion of Hamburg Hall was entirely financed by Heinz College and was completed
in September 2013. Heinz College students immediately benefited from convenient access
to the new student services and computing services suites. The construction of new
career services interview rooms provides up‐to‐date facilities for on‐campus recruiters.
[ 8 ] A December 2013 gift from The Heinz Endowments combined with gift commitments
from other donors enabled the Heinz College to expedite the final architectural design
of Phase II elements, finalize necessary construction planning, commence renovations
and expansion, and complete a structure that will add additional value to the college.
A new 150-seat auditorium in the courtyard between Hamburg Hall and Smith Hall was
constructed, and both levels of the rotunda were transformed into student study and
lounge spaces as well as a grand entrance and lobby area, and renamed as the Teresa