Engineers , the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation , the MacArthur Fellowship Program , and
the Guggenheim Fellowship Program . [ 15 ] Notably, thirteen SCS faculty and alumni
have won the A. M. Turing Award , the Association for Computing Machinery 's most
prestigious award, [ 16 ] often called the "Nobel Prize of computing. " These include
Raj Reddy , Manuel Blum and Edmund M. Clarke of the recent active faculty, in addition
to Emeritus Faculty Dana Scott and former faculty Geoffrey Hinton . [ 17 ] Randy Pausch
was a professor of computer science , human-computer interaction and design. Pausch
was also a best-selling author, who became known around the world after he gave "The
Last Lecture" speech on September 18, 2007 at Carnegie Mellon. Pausch was instrumental
in the development of Alice , a computer teaching tool. He also co-founded Carnegie
Mellon's Entertainment Technology Center . Randy Pausch died on July 25, 2008. [ 18
] Mary Shaw is the Alan J. Perlis Professor of Computer Science in the Institute for
Software Research at Carnegie Mellon University . Shaw published seminal work on software
engineering, and has lately become well known for her work on computer science education.
Shaw was awarded the National Medal of Technology and Innovation on November 21, 2014.
[ 19 ] Luis von Ahn is a Consulting Professor in the Computer Science Department,
where he also received his PhD in 2005. Von Ahn was named a MacArthur Fellow in 2006
(called the "genius" grant). [ 20 ] He also created Games With a Purpose, a website
where users can play games to help train computers to solve complicated problems,
in addition to reCAPTCHA and Duolingo . William L. "Red" Whittaker is a roboticist
and research professor of robotics at Carnegie Mellon who led the Tartan Racing team
to victory in the 2007 DARPA Grand Challenge . He is also leading a team of Carnegie
Mellon students to win the Google Lunar X Prize . [ 21 ] Whittaker is the Fredkin
Professor of Robotics at the Robotics Institute and the director of the Robotics Institute's
Field Robotics Center [ 22 ] since its creation in 1983. Whittaker earned his master's
and doctoral degrees in Civil Engineering from Carnegie Mellon in the late 1970s.
[ 23 ] Raj Reddy is the University Professor of Computer Science and Robotics and
Moza Bint Nasser Chair at the School of Computer Science at Carnegie Mellon University
. His areas of interest include artificial intelligence and human-computer interaction
. He received the ACM Turning award in 1994. He received the French Legion of Honour
in 1984 and Padma Bhushan award in 2001. He was also awarded the Honda Prize in 2005,
and the Vannevar Bush Award in 2006. [ 24 ] Reddy was the founding directory of the
Robotics Institute [ 25 ] and the Dean of School of Computer Science. He was one of