] 1986. Today the museum continues showcasing contemporary art by staging the Carnegie
International exhibition every three to five years. Numerous works from the International
exhibitions have been acquired for the museums' permanent collection including Winslow
Homer 's The Wreck (1896) and James A. McNeill Whistler 's Arrangement in Black: Portrait
of Señor Pablo de Sarasate (1884). [ 12 ] [ 13 ] The Hall of Sculpture, constructed
in white marble , replicates the interior of the Parthenon . [ 14 ] The Hall of Architecture
contains the largest collection of plaster casts of architectural masterpieces in
America and one of the three largest in the world. Opened in 1974, the Sarah Scaife
Galleries Annex was designed by Edward Larrabee Barnes and Associates. The Sarah Scaife
Foundation gift nearly doubled the exhibition square footage. The modernist addition
was designed to not compete with the existing building. Trustee James L. Winokur says
of architect Edward Larrabee Barnes, "He kept the old building out front. He was not
terribly concerned about getting credit, just concerned about doing the job right,
and he did do it right. " [ 10 ] The Heinz Architectural Center , opened as part of
the museum in 1993, is dedicated to the collection, study, and exhibition of architectural
drawings, prints and models. [ 11 ] Most of these are from the 19th and 20th centuries.
In 2001 the museum acquired the archive of African-American photographer Charles "Teenie"
Harris , consisting of approximately 80, 000 photographic negatives spanning from
the 1930s to the 1970s. Many of these images have been cataloged and digitized. The
museum's permanent collection includes European and American decorative arts from
the late seventeenth century to the present, works on paper, paintings, prints (most
notably Japanese prints), sculptures and installations. [ 11 ] Carnegie Museum of
Natural History Opened alongside the Carnegie Museum of Art in 1895, the Carnegie
Museum of Natural History is currently home to over twenty million objects and artifacts.
Carnegie oversaw the collecting from 1895 to 1907 and it reflected his ideas of evolutionary
development. [ 4 ] [ 15 ] Most notably, it houses a collection of 230 dinosaur fossils—including
the most complete Tyrannosaurus rex known to date—as well as exhibits such as Hillman
Hall of Minerals and Gems , Alcoa Foundation Hall of American Indians, and Walton
Hall of Ancient Egypt. The museum's Powdermill Nature Reserve was established in 1956
to serve as a field station for long-term studies of natural populations, and now
forms the core of the museum's Center for Biodiversity and Ecosystems. Research teams
that included Carnegie scientists have made discoveries such as Puijila darwini and
Hadrocodium wui . [ 16 ] [ 17 ] Kamin Science Center Opened in 1991, but with a history
that dates to October 24, 1939, the Kamin Science Center is the most visited museum
in Pittsburgh. [ 9 ] The Kamin Science Center houses the Buhl Planetarium & Observatory,