is in the work", when he donated the funds to create the institution. Carnegie's vision
was to open a vocational training school for the sons and daughters of working-class
Pittsburghers, many of whom worked in his mills. Carnegie was inspired for the design
of his school by the Pratt Institute in Brooklyn, New York , founded by industrialist
Charles Pratt in 1887. [ 19 ] In 1912, the institution changed its name to Carnegie
Institute of Technology (CIT) and began offering four-year degrees. During this time,
CIT consisted of four constituent schools: the School of Fine and Applied Arts, the
School of Apprentices and Journeymen, the School of Science and Technology, and the
Margaret Morrison Carnegie School for Women . The Mellon Institute of Industrial Research
was founded in 1913 by banker and industrialist brothers Andrew Mellon (who went on
to become U. S. Treasury Secretary ) and Richard B. Mellon in honor of their father,
Thomas Mellon , patriarch of the Mellon family . The Institute began as a research
organization that performed contract work for government and industry, initially as
a department within the University of Pittsburgh . In 1927, the Mellon Institute was
incorporated as an independent nonprofit. In 1937, the Mellon Institute's iconic building
was completed on Fifth Avenue. [ 20 ] In 1967, with support from Paul Mellon , the
Carnegie Institute of Technology merged with the Mellon Institute of Industrial Research
to become Carnegie Mellon University. In 1973, Carnegie Mellon's coordinate women's
college , the Margaret Morrison Carnegie College, merged its academic programs with
the rest of the university. [ 21 ] The industrial research mission of the Mellon Institute
survived the merger as the Carnegie Mellon Research Institute (CMRI) and continued
doing work on contract to industry and government. In 2001, CMRI's programs were subsumed
by other parts of the university or spun off into autonomous entities. [ 22 ] During
the 1970s and 1980s, the tenure of president Richard Cyert (1972–1990) witnessed a
period of growth and development. The research budget grew from roughly $12 million
annually in the early 1970s to more than $110 million in the late 1980s. Researchers
in new fields like robotics and software engineering helped the university to build
its reputation. One example was the introduction of the " Andrew " computing network
in the mid-1980s. This project linking all computers and workstations on campus set
the standard for educational computing and established Carnegie Mellon as a technology
leader in education and research. On April 24, 1985, cmu. edu , Carnegie Mellon's
Internet domain, became one of the first six . edu domain names. In the 1990s and
into the 2000s, Carnegie Mellon solidified its status among American universities,
consistently ranking in the top 25 in the national U. S. News & World Report rankings,
and in the top 30 (ranking 28th in 2022) amongst universities worldwide. [ 23 ] [
24 ] Carnegie Mellon is distinct in its interdisciplinary approach to research and