by Andrew Carnegie as the Carnegie Technical Schools . In 1912, it became the Carnegie
Institute of Technology and began granting four-year degrees. In 1967, it became Carnegie
Mellon University through its merger with the Mellon Institute of Industrial Research
, founded in 1913 by Andrew Mellon and Richard B. Mellon and formerly a part of the
University of Pittsburgh . [ 11 ] The university consists of seven colleges, including
the College of Engineering , the School of Computer Science , the Dietrich College
of Humanities and Social Sciences , and the Tepper School of Business . [ 12 ] The
university has its main campus located 5 miles (8. 0 km) from downtown Pittsburgh
. It also has over a dozen degree-granting locations on six continents, including
campuses in Qatar , Silicon Valley , and Kigali, Rwanda ( Carnegie Mellon University
Africa ) and partnerships with universities nationally and globally. [ 13 ] Carnegie
Mellon enrolls 15, 818 students across its multiple campuses from 117 countries and
employs more than 1, 400 faculty members. [ 14 ] Carnegie Mellon is a member of the
Association of American Universities and is classified among "R1: Doctoral Universities
– Very high research activity". [ 15 ] Carnegie Mellon competes in NCAA Division III
athletics as a founding member of the University Athletic Association . Carnegie Mellon
fields eight men's teams and nine women's teams as the Tartans. [ 16 ] The university's
faculty and alumni include 21 Nobel Prize laureates and 13 Turing Award winners and
have received 142 Emmy Awards , 64 Tony Awards , and 13 Academy Awards . [ 17 ] The
Carnegie Technical Schools were founded in 1900 in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania [ 18 ]
by the Scottish-American industrialist and philanthropist Andrew Carnegie , who wrote
"My heart is in the work", when he donated the funds to create the institution. Carnegie's
vision was to open a vocational training school for the sons and daughters of working-class
Pittsburghers, many of whom worked in his mills. Carnegie was inspired for the design
of his school by the Pratt Institute in Brooklyn, New York , founded by industrialist
Charles Pratt in 1887. [ 19 ] In 1912, the institution changed its name to Carnegie
Institute of Technology (CIT) and began offering four-year degrees. During this time,
CIT consisted of four constituent schools: the School of Fine and Applied Arts, the
School of Apprentices and Journeymen, the School of Science and Technology, and the
Margaret Morrison Carnegie School for Women . The Mellon Institute of Industrial Research
was founded in 1913 by banker and industrialist brothers Andrew Mellon (who went on
to become U. S. Treasury Secretary ) and Richard B. Mellon in honor of their father,
Thomas Mellon , patriarch of the Mellon family . The Institute began as a research
organization that performed contract work for government and industry, initially as
a department within the University of Pittsburgh . In 1927, the Mellon Institute was