At what age did the director of August Wilson's Cycle pass?
Carnegie is buried only a few yards away from who?
In 2023, the PIttsburgh City Council approved an increase to the police budget by what dollar amount?
What was the name of the general that took command in 1777 of Fort Pitt?
What is the area at the center of campus in Carnegie Mellon known as? This place is also home to The Fence at CMU.
What date does the RV Fall Show start in 2025?
Who invented the first micro electro mechanical system?
The Pittsburgh Triangles played tennis where?
The Gene Kelly Awards honors students in what study / major?
From which university will a new program bring med students to the University of Pittsburgh?
Which batman movie was filmed at Carnegie mellon?
What does the tradition of sliding or stepping on the former home plate of Forbes Field signify?
In 1946, who was hired by Carnegie Institute of Technology to restart the school's economics department?
What time is The Steel City Spooky Market happening?
In what year was The Management Game first introduced by CMU?
Who was the chancellor of University of Pittsburgh from 1995 to 2014?
In what year did Carnegie Science Center enter the Carnegie Museums?
In 2001, Heinz Field and PNC Park replaced what stadium?
Who told the Madwoman to be on her way?
Who is UPitt's 18th chancellor?
What is the largest non-government employer in Allegnheny County?
In what year did Pittsburgh's Nickelodeon introduce the moving picture theater?
How many visitors does Station Square attract?
The Steelers have been owned by which family since the team's founding in 1933?
Who was the first rector of Trinity Episcopal Church of Pittsburgh?
In what year did Virginia and Pennsylvania come to an agreement on their mutual borders?
Before Mike Tomlin, who was the head coach of football at UPitt?
In 1883, Carnegie bought which rival of his own company?
Are gift memberships at Carnegie Museums transferable? Answer yes or no.
By 1850, what was another nicknmame for Pittsburgh?
Where was Mark Cuban born?
After World War II, what was the name of the civic revitalization project that Pittsburgh began?
Did Carnegie oppose the annexation of the Hawaiian islands?
What percentage of steel was produced in Pittsburgh by war's end?
What day will Ben Folds return to pittsburgh to play with the Pittsburgh Symphony?
In 2024, how many Carnegie Mellon graduate programs ranked in the top 10 nationwide?
What is the main stage acts on Cedarville exclusively?
What number can I call for Carnegie Museum / Carnegie Museum of Art Theater? Format your answer as one number.
In which hall is the College's Office of the Dean housed in?
What is Pittsburgh most similar to in terms of annual percent average possible sunshine received?
What kind of method did Carnegie encourage in terms of investigation of the various causes of war?
Which interstate numbers (three of them) roughly form a triangular-shaped beltway with Interstate 68 and 80? Write your answer as comma separated values in increasing order.
When was "Examining the American Peace Movement Prior to World War I" written?
What year was the Carnegie Mellon School of Computer Science established?
Scott made it possible for Carnegie to invest what dollar amount into Adams Express Company?
Pittsburgh was transformed into a liberal stronghold of what group?
Kamin Science Center attracts nearly how many visitors each year?
Squirrel Hill is home to approximately how many synagogues?
Raj Reddy holds what chair at the School of Computer Science at CMU?
Night of the Living Dead, produced in 1968, was made by who?
What are the Sunday hours of the Pittsburgh Symphony?
Who is the top employer in Pittsburgh?
When is the upcoming ABBA concert?
What is the region's largest heritage festival?
What is the motto of Carnegie Mellon University?
What major park borders the CMU campus?
Which U.S. president visited Carnegie Mellon in 2008 to give a speech?
What year was the Software Engineering Institute established at CMU?
Which school at CMU is known for drama and the arts?
How many Super Bowl titles have the Pittsburgh Steelers won?
What annual Pittsburgh event celebrates Irish heritage?
In what year did Pittsburgh host the G20 summit?
Which Pittsburgh company is famous for ketchup?
What is the name of the Pittsburgh NBA G League team?
What famous inventor of the polio vaccine worked at the University of Pittsburgh?
Which Pittsburgh university was founded by Andrew Carnegie?
Which Pittsburgh-born playwright wrote “Fences”?
What is the name of Pittsburgh’s international airport?
Which Pittsburgh medical center is one of the largest hospital systems in the U.S.?
Which Pittsburgh landmark is known as “The Point”?
What year was the University of Pittsburgh founded?
What Pittsburgh neighborhood is home to the Cathedral of Learning?
What was the first building constructed on CMU’s campus?
What research center at CMU focuses on cybersecurity?
What year did the Mellon Institute merge into CMU?
What is the name of the Pittsburgh NHL hockey team?
What Pittsburgh bridge is painted bright yellow and named after a famous baseball player?
Which university’s basketball team is called the Panthers?
Which Pittsburgh film festival celebrates independent cinema?
Which famous zombie filmmaker studied in Pittsburgh?
Which Pittsburgh neighborhood is home to CMU and Pitt?
What two rivers meet to form the Ohio River?
What is the tallest building in Pittsburgh?
What iconic Pittsburgh sandwich is topped with French fries and coleslaw?
In what division does Pitt-Greensburg compete in athletically?
What is the Carnegie Mellon Tartans original fight song titled?
What is the Carnegie Mellon football fraternity called?
What famous machine learning venue had its first conference in Pittsburgh in 1980?
When is homecoming weekend for CMU125?
Where is the Untitled (Art Party) hosted?
What is CMU’s official mascot?
What student-run musical theater organization is famous at CMU?
What is the name of CMU’s student newspaper?
Which Pittsburgh-born composer wrote the music for “Mister Rogers’ Neighborhood”?
What CMU alum voiced the character Sid in the Ice Age movies?
Which Pittsburgh landmark is lit up with neon red sign that says “PITTSBURGH”?
What is the name of the iconic CMU building whose rotunda is topped by a green dome and serves as a symbol of the university?
In what year did the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra make its debut at Carnegie Music Hall in Oakland?
Which Pittsburgh neighborhood is home to the historic Frick Park, the city’s largest regional park?
What CMU robotics lab is famous for developing self-driving car technology that won the 2007 DARPA Urban Challenge?
When did construction to complete the Mon–Fayette Expressway toward Duquesne begin?
Which corridor from Pittsburgh to Uniontown is the project intended to relieve?
What unified number identifies the cross-state corridor serving the Pittsburgh region?
Which river does the Expressway Bridge cross on the approach to Pittsburgh?
Which agency maintains most of the tollway segments serving the Pittsburgh area?
After entering Pennsylvania, through which Fayette County township does the route first pass?
What is the name of the mainline toll plaza encountered near Fairchance?
In which township is the Redstone mainline toll gantry located?
Where is the Telegraph Road exit situated along the approach toward Pittsburgh?
Which state route briefly runs concurrent with the corridor near US 40 before splitting at a cloverleaf?
Which local road interchange provides connections to US 40 and PA 51 along the way?
Which side of Pittsburgh is the planned high-speed link designed to serve?
Which interstate to the west does the corridor aim to provide an alternative to for regional travel?
Which two interstates form the southern and planned northern connections related to Pittsburgh?
Which Pittsburgh television station is identified as the Fox affiliate?
Which three universities in Pittsburgh are listed together in the text?
What is the title of the famous CMU “Last Lecture” by Randy Pausch?
Which classic experiment illustrating wave–particle duality is referenced in the file?
Which principle in quantum mechanics limits simultaneous precision of position and momentum?
In chemistry, what are charged species formed by losing or gaining electrons called?
What is the championship game of the National Football League pursued by Pittsburgh’s NFL team?
Which early pro football player signed a $500 contract to face a Pittsburgh club?
Which Ivy League AAU founding member in Pennsylvania is mentioned (regional context to CMU)?
In which West Virginia county is Cheat Lake located at the southern terminus toward Pittsburgh?
Which interchange on the Uniontown bypass provides access to PA 21?
After crossing the Monongahela, which Washington County borough does the route enter?
Which town is bypassed to the west as the tollway continues north through woodland?
Which U.S. route joins the bypass west of Uniontown before later splitting northwest?
Which state agency maintains the short segment of the corridor in West Virginia?
What is the name of CMU’s computer science complex along Forbes Avenue?
Which CMU college is abbreviated “CIT” (also referred to as the College of Engineering)?
Which CMU college is abbreviated “DC” (Dietrich College of Humanities & Social Sciences)?
Which CMU college is named for H. John Heinz III?
In which Silicon Valley city is CMU’s West Coast campus located?
CMU’s West Coast campus is located inside which NASA facility?
In what Middle Eastern country is CMU’s branch campus at Education City?
In what year did CMU open its branch campus in Education City?
What is the name of the large urban park that borders CMU’s campus and contains Phipps Conservatory?
What is the name of the glasshouse and gardens in Oakland near CMU?
Which two Carnegie Museums share the historic building on Forbes Avenue in Oakland?
What is the official home ballpark of the Pittsburgh Pirates?
What is the street address of that ballpark?
What indoor arena is the home venue of the Pittsburgh Penguins?
What is the street address of that arena?
What National Historic Landmark park sits at the tip of Pittsburgh’s “Golden Triangle”?
According to the 2020 U.S. Census, approximately how many people live in the City of Pittsburgh?
What is the three-digit telephone area code most associated with Pittsburgh?
What riverside trail system offers about 33 miles of urban paths through Pittsburgh and Allegheny County?
What famed museum on the North Shore houses the world’s largest collection of Warhol art and archives?
What history museum in the Strip District is Pennsylvania’s largest and an affiliate of the Smithsonian Institution?
