flag of Pittsburgh is colored with black and gold, based on the colors of William
Pitt 's coat of arms ; Pittsburgh is the only city in the United States in which all
professional sporting teams share the same colors. The city's first National Hockey
League (NHL) franchise, the Pittsburgh Pirates , and that team's non-NHL predecessor,
the Pittsburgh Yellow Jackets , wore black and gold as their colors in the 1920s.
The colors were adopted by founder of the Pittsburgh Steelers, Art Rooney , in 1933.
In 1948, the Pittsburgh baseball Pirates switched their colors from red and blue to
black and gold. Pittsburgh's second NHL franchise, the Pittsburgh Penguins , wore
blue and white, due to then-general manager Jack Riley's upbringing in Ontario . In
1979, after the Steelers and Pirates had each won their respective league championships,
the Penguins altered their color scheme to match, despite objections from the Boston
Bruins , [ 2 ] [ 3 ] who have used the black and gold combination since the 1935–36
NHL season . [ 4 ] [ 5 ] In 1975, late Steelers radio broadcaster Myron Cope invented
the Terrible Towel , which has become "arguably the best-known fan symbol of any major
pro sports team. " [ 6 ] Cope was one of multiple sports figures born in Pittsburgh
and its surrounding area; others include golfer Arnold Palmer , Olympian and retired
professional wrestler Kurt Angle , and basketball player Jack Twyman . Pittsburgh
is also sometimes called the "Cradle of Quarterbacks" [ 7 ] [ 8 ] due to the number
of prominent players of that position who hail from the area, including NFL greats
Jim Kelly , George Blanda , Johnny Unitas , Joe Namath , Dan Marino , and Joe Montana
. Professional team sports The City of Pittsburgh has had various professional sports
franchises throughout its history and today is home to three teams competing at the
highest professional level in their respective sports: the Pittsburgh Pirates of the
MLB , the Pittsburgh Steelers of the NFL , and the Pittsburgh Penguins of the NHL
. Major League Professional Teams Minor League Professional Teams Top Tier Amateur
Teams Prior to 1876, three amateur Pittsburgh baseball teams—the Enterprise, the Xanthas,
and the Olympics—competed, most often at Recreation Park . [ 10 ] On April 15, 1876,
Recreation Park was the site of a game between the Xanthas and the Pittsburgh Alleghenies
(alternately spelled "Alleghenys" [ 11 ] ), an unrelated forerunner to the "Alleghenys"
team which would later be renamed the Pirates. The Alleghenies won the game 7–3. [
12 ] The 1877 squad was the most successful yet, finishing within 1 game of the pennant
in the International Association ; only a Canadian team had a better record, allowing
the city potential bragging rights for being the best American team that season. 1882
marked the first "major league" and fully professional season for the Pittsburgh Alleghenies