Caliente’s had seven spaces in 2019, and most other restaurants and bars had two spaces.
State Farm Insurance also took advantage of Little Italy Days attendees by bringing
in their corporate headquarters to gather email addresses and potential new customers.
Oriental Massage was giving free neck massages and specials for the weekend. These
are examples of what all businesses can do during the festival to get more customers.
Commonwealth Press, Flower Printing, Froggy’s Azorean Café, Spill the Wine, Iron Lung,
Smokin Brews and Fudge Farm are eight new businesses on Liberty Avenue that have been
able to better promote their businesses to the many festival attendees. The following
are a few quotes from Bloomfield Businesses. (These and all the information are available
on the supporting videos) Caliente – Nick Bogacz “We pay our taxes with this money”
“My family depends on this” Merante’s – Maria Merante “We do one month’s worth of
business in four days. ” Lot 17 – Dave Namestnk – “It’s great exposure” Paddy Cake
Bakery – Patrick Connolly – “Where can you have a business where 20, 000 come to your
front door to try your product? ” *Little Lou’s Bar – Steve Lardo – “We do two weeks’
worth of business in four days. ” *Azorean Café – Elsa Santos – “It’s great exposure
for us as a brand-new business” *Pleasure Bar – Jamie Campau - “It’s a lot of extra
revenue and money we need to pay bills and payroll” *Station – Curtis Gamble - “Over
the four-day festival we really do see a substantial increase in business that helps
our bottom line, especially coming out of June and July which are the slowest months
of the year” *Lombardozzi’s – Tony Lombardozzi, Jr. “Not only do we get a lot of business
that week but there is a substantial amount of new business and repeat customers throughout
the year after initial contact is during Little Italy Days. ” *St. Maria Goretti Parish
– raised over $17, 000 in four days. See their totals below that is copied from the
“Our Faith Community News” section of the Parish Bulletin. The Little Italy Days were
not only a great success from an evangelization perspective but also as a fundraiser.
The final profit totals for the four days: Food Sales $10, 924 Flea Market $ 3, 987
50/50 Raffle $ 275 Lottery Basket $ 139 Ateleta Women Donation $ 518 Total $15, 843
Tent Rental - $ 475 Electric Pole - $ 300 Net Total to School $15, 068 St. Joseph
Church Donations $ 2, 158. 65 Madonna della Civita $361 (to St. Vincent de Paul) Thank
you once again to all the parishioners and parents from the school that helped to
make this evangelization effort and fundraiser such a success! If the reasoning is
that Little Italy Days should only offer Italian Vendors, then property owners in
the business district should only rent their buildings to Italian Themed Businesses.