The culture of Pittsburgh stems from the city's long history as a center for cultural
philanthropy , as well as its rich ethnic traditions. In the 19th and 20th centuries,
wealthy businessmen such as Andrew Carnegie , Henry J. Heinz , Henry Clay Frick ,
and nonprofit organizations such as the Carnegie Foundation donated millions of dollars
to create educational and cultural institutions. The Frank Lloyd Wright masterpiece
Fallingwater is about an hour's drive from Downtown Pittsburgh . The North Shore has
an 1895 neogothic church, Calvary Methodist , with an interior designed by Louis Comfort
Tiffany . The church's stained glass windows are some of the largest and most elaborate
work Tiffany ever created. The Church of the Immaculate Heart of Mary in Pittsburgh
, an opulently decorated edifice with elaborate Old World flourishes is one of the
finest examples of the so-called Polish Cathedral style , [ 1 ] dominating the skyline
over Polish Hill . The Allegheny County Courthouse (1886), designed by H. H. Richardson
, is a unique and influential building. At 42 stories, the University of Pittsburgh
's Cathedral of Learning (1937) is the second tallest collegiate building in the world.
The tallest skyscraper in Pittsburgh is the triangular U. S. Steel Tower . Both Acrisure
Stadium (2001) and PNC Park (2001) are designed to give fans a view of the city skyline.
The David L. Lawrence Convention Center , located on the south bank of the Allegheny
River , is able to accommodate all sizes of conventions, exhibitions and conferences.
Certified with a Gold rating by the U. S. Green Building Council's Leadership in Energy
and Environmental Design initiative, the building is considered the first ever "green"
convention center and world's largest "green" building. The region has hosted over
1, 000 film and television works since the first production was filmed in the city
in 1898. Since 1990 the Pittsburgh Film Office has marketed the greater southwestern
Pennsylvania region as a great location for movie, television and commercial productions.
The PFO has assisted more than 102 feature films and television productions to southwestern
Pennsylvania to generate an economic impact of more than $575 million for the region.
[ 2 ] Pittsburgh Filmmakers teaches media arts and runs three " arthouse " movie theaters
and since 1981 the Three Rivers Film Festival has brought national attention to local