SYNOPSIS ACT I. In their Latin Quarter garret on Christmas Eve, the painter Marcello
and poet Rodolfo try to keep warm by burning pages from Rodolfo's latest drama. They
are joined by their comrades—Colline, a young philosopher, and Schaunard, a musician
who has landed a job and brings food, fuel, and funds (Legna! . . . Sigari! ). While
they celebrate their unexpected fortune, the landlord, Benoit, arrives to collect
the rent. Plying the older man with wine, they urge him to tell of his flirtations,
then throw him out in mock indignation. As the friends depart for a celebration at
the nearby Café Momus, Rodolfo promises to join them soon, staying behind to finish
writing an article. There’s another knock; a neighbor, Mimì, says her candle has gone
out on the drafty stairs. Offering her wine when she feels faint, Rodolfo relights
her candle and helps her to the door. Mimì realizes she has dropped her key, and as
the two search for it, both candles are blown out. In the moonlight the poet takes
the girl's shivering hand (Che gelida manina "What a cold little hand") telling her
his dreams. She then recounts her solitary life (Sì, mi chiamano Mimì "Yes, they call
me Mimì"), embroidering flowers and dreaming of spring. Drawn to each other, Mimì
and Rodolfo leave for the café (O soave fanciulla "Oh lovely girl"). ACT II. Amid
shouts of street hawkers, Rodolfo buys Mimì a bonnet near the Café Momus and introduces
her to his friends. They all sit and order supper. A toy vendor, Parpignol, passes
by, besieged by children. Marcello's former lover, Musetta, enters on the arm of the
older wealthy Alcindoro. Determined to make Marcello jealous and test his attraction
to her, Musetta flirtatiously sings a waltz. (Quando me’n vo “When I walk out”). Complaining
that her shoe pinches, Musetta sends Alcindoro to fetch a new pair, then falls into
Marcello's arms. The Bohemians leave Alcindoro to face the bill when he returns. ACT
III. At dawn on the snowy outskirts of Paris, a Customs Officer admits street sweepers
and farm women to the city. Musetta and revelers are heard inside a tavern. Soon Mimì
arrives searching for Marcello . When the painter emerges, she pours out her distress
over Rodolfo's incessant jealousy (Mimì! . . . Speravo di trovarvi qui). It is best