making money from steel transport. The steel and railroad barons worked closely to
negotiate prices instead of allowing free-market competition. [ 41 ] Besides Carnegie's
market manipulation, United States trade tariffs were also working in favor of the
steel industry. Carnegie spent energy and resources lobbying Congress for a continuation
of favorable tariffs from which he earned millions of dollars a year. [ 42 ] Carnegie
tried to keep this information concealed, but legal documents released in 1900, during
proceedings with the ex-chairman of Carnegie Steel, Henry Clay Frick , revealed how
favorable the tariffs had been. [ 43 ] 1901: U. S. Steel In 1901, Carnegie was 65
years of age and considering retirement. He reformed his enterprises into conventional
joint stock corporations as preparation for this. John Pierpont Morgan was a banker
and America's most important financial deal maker. He had observed how efficiently
Carnegie produced profits. He envisioned an integrated steel industry that would cut
costs, lower prices to consumers, produce in greater quantities and raise wages to
workers. To this end, he needed to buy out Carnegie and several other major producers
and integrate them into one company, thereby eliminating duplication and waste. He
concluded negotiations on March 2, 1901, and formed the United States Steel Corporation
. It was the first corporation in the world with a market capitalization of over $1
billion. The buyout, secretly negotiated by Charles M. Schwab (no relation to Charles
R. Schwab ), was the largest such industrial takeover in United States history to
date. The holdings were incorporated in the United States Steel Corporation, a trust
organized by Morgan, and Carnegie retired from business. [ 33 ] His steel enterprises
were bought out for $303, 450, 000. [ 7 ] Carnegie's share of this amounted to $225.
64 million (in 2024, $8. 53 billion), which was paid to him in the form of 5%, 50-year
gold bonds. The letter agreeing to sell his share was signed on February 26, 1901.
On March 2, the circular formally filed the organization and capitalization (at $1.
4 billion—4% of the U. S. gross domestic product at the time) of the United States
Steel Corporation actually completed the contract. The bonds were to be delivered
within two weeks to the Hudson Trust Company of Hoboken, New Jersey , in trust to
Robert A. Franks, Carnegie's business secretary. There, a special vault was built
to house the physical bulk of nearly $230 million worth of bonds. [ 44 ] Scholar and
activist 1880–1900 Carnegie continued his business career; some of his literary intentions
were fulfilled. He befriended the English poet Matthew Arnold , the English philosopher
Herbert Spencer , and the American humorist Mark Twain , as well as being in correspondence
and acquaintance with most of the U. S. Presidents , statesmen, and notable writers.
Carnegie constructed commodious swimming-baths for the people of his hometown in Dunfermline