but there is a substantial amount of new business and repeat customers throughout
the year after initial contact is during Little Italy Days. ” *St. Maria Goretti Parish
– raised over $17, 000 in four days. See their totals below that is copied from the
“Our Faith Community News” section of the Parish Bulletin. The Little Italy Days were
not only a great success from an evangelization perspective but also as a fundraiser.
The final profit totals for the four days: Food Sales $10, 924 Flea Market $ 3, 987
50/50 Raffle $ 275 Lottery Basket $ 139 Ateleta Women Donation $ 518 Total $15, 843
Tent Rental - $ 475 Electric Pole - $ 300 Net Total to School $15, 068 St. Joseph
Church Donations $ 2, 158. 65 Madonna della Civita $361 (to St. Vincent de Paul) Thank
you once again to all the parishioners and parents from the school that helped to
make this evangelization effort and fundraiser such a success! If the reasoning is
that Little Italy Days should only offer Italian Vendors, then property owners in
the business district should only rent their buildings to Italian Themed Businesses.
It’s no different from a businessman producing a festival. Liberty Avenue property
owners are businessmen that profit from their tenants with no accountability to the
community. Decrepit buildings like the laundromat at Pearl St. , businesses such as
Ace Check Cashing, and 13 vacancies on Liberty Avenue are examples of this. Along
Liberty Avenue, the tree beds are overgrown and littered with garbage that Little
Italy Days staff, not local stakeholders, cleaned and mulched on Sunday before the
festival. Residents and community groups should press to have these building owners
maintain and clean up their property all year long and force a community process for
this purpose as well. The Little Italy Days team welcomes a community process and
is always listening to concerns. CORPORATE VENDORS These types of vendors are at every
festival, solely to offset the costs of producing the festival. Sponsorships are more
difficult to get as boards, managers and the economic climate changes. Additionally,
costs to produce an event with three stages of entertainment, (30 acts), permits,
tents, tables, chairs, sound systems, paramedics, advertising, promotion, crossing
guards, insurance, signage, labor, clean-up, dumpsters, porta-johns, barricades, police,
shuttle buses and overnight security continue to rise. MAKING THE EVENT SMALLER From
2002 to 2011, Little Italy Days was operated by the local non-profit community groups,
first the Bloomfield Business Association, then the Bloomfield Development Corporation.
In its early years, all the organizers were business owners and would work around
the clock to manage the festival. There was very little support from the local businesses
with organization or fundraising. Through the community group, money was raised from
grants and fundraising, but the costs increased every year. Even with many volunteers,
it was a challenge to break even. Business owners and community groups do not have