Bank, First National Bank, WesBanco, and PNC Bank. Both Highmark and UPMC have mobile
units present during the festival for community outreach. Line at Angelo’s COMMUNITY
OUTREACH Bloomfield currently has four active non-profit organizations that we communicate
with regularly: Bloomfield Business Network (BBN) – The Bloomfield Business Network
is a membership based community organization that strives to promote local businesses
in the Liberty Avenue, Baum Boulevard, and Main Street corridors by maintaining the
community’s image and offering resources to sustain the neighborhood in the present
and the future. (Mission) Bloomfield Citizens Council (BCC) – Represents the Citizens
of Bloomfield. Bloomfield Development Corporation (BDC) – Focuses mainly on community
engagement with development, and other issues, and hosts meetings related to specific
issues. The mission of the Bloomfield Development Corporation is to build a thriving,
diverse community through equitable engagement. Bloomfield Livable Streets (BLS) -
advocates for infrastructural enhancements that promote accessibility and safety for
all users of Bloomfield streets. The Bloomfield Business Network and The Bloomfield
Citizens Council have given their total support to the festival organization, and
Mr. Richetti keeps open communication line with all community groups throughout the
year. We are always open to listening to the community and rely on the Community Groups
to use their methods of notifying businesses and residents, as they do for all of
their other facilitated community events. PROCEDURES OF OTHER BLOOMFIELD EVENTS Every
year, three other events are held in Bloomfield that close Liberty Avenue; The Pittsburgh
Marathon, The Halloween Parade and the Columbus Day Parade. No public meetings are
requested for any of these events, nor is there any business development plan that
remotely compares to the Little Italy Days Plan. Separate from the events listed above,
Little Italy Days has and can operate without closing Liberty Avenue. It is the decision
of the City of Pittsburgh Public Safety to close a street and they do so only for
safety purposes. Liberty Avenue is closed for only two days during the four- day festival
at which time, Taylor St. , Mathilda St. and Milvale Ave. are all open to cross over
Liberty Avenue with crossing guards in place. This is a safer and more efficient arrangement
than complete side street closures. COMMUNITY BENEFITS and OPPORTUNITIES *School fundraising
– St. Maria Goretti school is aggressively fundraising to keep the school open. As
written in the “Spirit of Bloomfield Magazine”, the fundraising committee is looking
forward to Little Italy Days to set up booths and raise a lot of money towards their
goal. Little Italy Days is extremely important to the local school for fundraising
opportunities. *Business Recruitment Opportunities – Little Italy Days is an ideal
time for the local Community Development Corporations to showcase Bloomfield. The
owner of Tambellini’s Food Service has been attending the festival for 15 years and
recently purchased a building on Liberty Avenue. *Fundraising for non-profits – Free
Space is provided for the local community groups to do their own fundraising. With