Newell-Simon hall. [ 117 ] The Software Engineering Institute (SEI) is a federally
funded research and development center sponsored by the U. S. Department of Defense
and operated by Carnegie Mellon, with offices in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA and
Arlington, Virginia. The SEI publishes books on software engineering for industry,
government and military applications and practices. The organization is known for
its Capability Maturity Model [ 118 ] [ 119 ] (CMM) and Capability Maturity Model
Integration (CMMI), which identify essential elements of effective system and software
engineering processes and can be used to rate the level of an organization's capability
for producing quality systems. The SEI is also the home of CERT/CC , the federally
funded computer security organization. The CERT Program's primary goals are to support
secure requirements and development of computer systems and ensure that appropriate
technology and systems management practices are used to resist attacks on networked
systems and to limit damage and ensure continuity of critical services subsequent
to attacks, accidents, or failures. [ 120 ] The Human–Computer Interaction Institute
(HCII) is a division of the School of Computer Science and is considered one of the
leading centers of human–computer interaction research, integrating computer science,
design, social science, and learning science. [ 121 ] Such interdisciplinary collaboration
is the hallmark of research done throughout the university. The Language Technologies
Institute (LTI) is another unit of the School of Computer Science and is famous for
being one of the leading research centers in the area of language technologies . The
primary research focus of the institute is on machine translation , speech recognition
, speech synthesis , information retrieval , parsing and information extraction .
[ 122 ] Until 1996, the institute existed as the Center for Machine Translation that
was established in 1986. From 1996 onwards, it started awarding graduate degrees and
the name was changed to Language Technologies Institute. The Ray and Stephanie Lane
Computational Biology Department , one of the seven departments in the School of Computer
Science , was established in 2007 (as Lane Center for Computational Biology), officially
became a department within the School of Computer Science in 2009, and named the Ray
and Stephanie Lane Computational Biology Department in 2023. The department is the
leader in developing computational methodologies to advance biomedical research. Carnegie
Mellon is also home to the Carnegie School of management and economics. This intellectual
school grew out of the Tepper School of Business in the 1950s and 1960s and focused
on the intersection of behavioralistm and management. Several management theories,
most notably bounded rationality and the behavioral theory of the firm , were established
by Carnegie School management scientists and economists. Carnegie Mellon also develops
cross-disciplinary and university-wide institutes and initiatives to take advantage
of strengths in various colleges and departments and develop solutions in critical
social and technical problems. To date, these have included the Cylab Security and
Privacy Institute , the Wilton E. Scott Institute for Energy Innovation, the Neuroscience