the world's first lenticular truss bridge. The city's Three Sisters Bridges offer
a picturesque view of the city from the North. The southwestern "entrance" to Downtown
for travelers coming in from Interstate 79 and the Pittsburgh International Airport
is through the Fort Pitt Tunnel and over the Fort Pitt Bridge . The Fort Duquesne
Bridge carrying Interstate 279 is the main gateway from Downtown to both PNC Park
, Acrisure Stadium and the Rivers Casino . The Panhandle Bridge carries Pittsburgh
Regional Transit's Blue/Red/Silver subway lines across the Monongahela River . The
renovated J&L Steel Company bridge has been a key traffic/running-biking trail conduit
connecting the Southside Works and Pittsburgh Technology Center . Over 2, 000 bridges
span the landscape of Allegheny County. [ 278 ] Public transportation statistics Pittsburgh
is served by Pittsburgh Regional Transit , the 26th-largest transit agency in the
country prior to the COVID-19 pandemic . The average amount of time people spend commuting
with public transit in Pittsburgh, for example to and from work, on a weekday is 73
minutes, while 23% of public transit riders ride for more than two hours every day.
The average amount of time people wait at a stop or station for public transit is
17 minutes, while 33% of riders wait for over 20 minutes on average every day. The
average distance people usually ride in a single trip with public transit is 3. 9
mi (6. 3 km), while 11% travel for over 7. 5 mi (12 km) in a single direction. [ 279
] Expressways and highways Locals refer to the interstates fanning out from downtown
Pittsburgh as the "parkways. " Interstate 376 is both the "parkway east" connecting
to Interstate 76 ( Pennsylvania Turnpike ) and the "parkway west" connecting to Interstate
79 , the Pittsburgh International Airport , the Ohio end of the Turnpike and Interstate
80 . The "parkway north" is Interstate 279 connecting to I-79. The "crosstown" is
Interstate 579 allowing access to the heart of downtown, the Liberty Tunnels and the
PPG Paints Arena . The 45-mile-long and 70-mile-long expressway sections of Pennsylvania
Route 28 and U. S. Route 22 also carry traffic from downtown to the northeast and
western suburbs, respectively. Interstate 70 , 79 and 76 (the Turnpike) roughly form
a triangular-shaped "beltway" with Interstate 68 and 80 within the media market's
northern and southern limits. Turnpike spurs such as the Mon–Fayette Expressway ,
Pennsylvania Route 576 and Route 66 also help traffic flow. The non-expressway Pittsburgh/Allegheny
County Belt System serves navigation in the region. Pittsburgh International Airport
provides commercial passenger service from over 15 airlines to the Pittsburgh metropolitan
area . Arnold Palmer Regional Airport also provides limited commercial passenger service
and is 44 miles (71 km) east of Pittsburgh. Other airports that have or have had scheduled
commercial service include Morgantown Municipal Airport (79 miles (127 km) south of
Pittsburgh), Youngstown–Warren Regional Airport (81 miles (130 km) northwest of Pittsburgh),