a network of intracity bus routes, two inclines on Mt. Washington above Downtown (mostly
a tourist attraction rather than a means of commuting), and a light rail / busway
system. The transit agency discontinued its commuter rail system, the PATrain , in
1989, However, A New Line To Arnold Has Been Proposed Since 2009. The light rail network
is a direct descendant of the original streetcar system , which once numbered dozens
of lines and included interurban routes to neighboring cities such as Washington and
Charleroi . The current network comprises five routes on 25 miles (40 km) of track,
operated by modern articulated light rail vehicles . Although most is on dedicated
right-of-way, including the Mt. Washington Transit Tunnel , trains still street run
in the Beechview neighborhood. Once across the Monongahela River trains enter a subway
to serve Downtown Pittsburgh . Since March 2012, the North Shore Connector has extended
service across the Allegheny River, via tunnel, to such destinations as PNC Park ,
Heinz Field , and Rivers Casino . Light rail lines are designated by the following
colors: Red Line —former 42S South Hills Village via Beechview light rail route Blue
Line —former 47S South Hills Village via Overbrook light rail route Silver Line —
former 47L Library via Overbrook light rail route Busways and Bus Rapid Transit (BRT)
PRT operates over 800 buses on both standard routes and bus rapid transit routes in
Allegheny County. The latter use high-speed articulated buses that run at grade and
above ground on their own right-of-way with platform stations, much like a rail system.
In some instances, such as the Mount Washington tunnel, these buses travel along paved
sections of the light rail line. There are currently three routes: the South Busway
, from downtown to the southern part of Allegheny County, the Martin Luther King Jr.
East Busway , from the Amtrak station to the eastern suburbs, and the West Busway
, to the western suburbs. Future plans include extending the West Busway to the Pittsburgh
International Airport . All light rail/busway stations outside the downtown have PRT
station shuttles that serve the surrounding neighborhoods, and sections of the metropolitan
area not served by the light rail/busway system, including most of the northern suburbs,
have regular PRT bus routes. The mass transit systems of Beaver , Fayette , Lawrence
, Washington , and Westmoreland counties (including Mid Mon Valley Transit Authority
) operate their own commuter shuttles to and from the city; the private company Myers
Coach Line operates commuter service from Butler County. [ 7 ] The mass transit system
of Monongalia County, West Virginia also provides connections to Pittsburgh. In early
2005 the Southwestern Pennsylvania Commission proposed combining Pittsburgh Regional
Transit, then known as Port Authority, with the nine surrounding metro counties transit
agencies. [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ failed verification ] Busways are designated by the following
colors: On July 22, 2011, the Port Authority approved spending at least $1 million,