it started awarding graduate degrees and the name was changed to Language Technologies
Institute. The Ray and Stephanie Lane Computational Biology Department , one of the
seven departments in the School of Computer Science , was established in 2007 (as
Lane Center for Computational Biology), officially became a department within the
School of Computer Science in 2009, and named the Ray and Stephanie Lane Computational
Biology Department in 2023. The department is the leader in developing computational
methodologies to advance biomedical research. Carnegie Mellon is also home to the
Carnegie School of management and economics. This intellectual school grew out of
the Tepper School of Business in the 1950s and 1960s and focused on the intersection
of behavioralistm and management. Several management theories, most notably bounded
rationality and the behavioral theory of the firm , were established by Carnegie School
management scientists and economists. Carnegie Mellon also develops cross-disciplinary
and university-wide institutes and initiatives to take advantage of strengths in various
colleges and departments and develop solutions in critical social and technical problems.
To date, these have included the Cylab Security and Privacy Institute , the Wilton
E. Scott Institute for Energy Innovation, the Neuroscience Institute , the Simon Initiative,
and the Disruptive Healthcare Technology Institute. Carnegie Mellon has made a concerted
effort to attract corporate research labs, offices, and partnerships to the Pittsburgh
campus. Apple Inc. , Intel , Google , Microsoft , Disney , Facebook , IBM , General
Motors , Bombardier Inc. , Yahoo! , Uber , Tata Consultancy Services , Ansys , Boeing
, Robert Bosch GmbH , and the Rand Corporation have established a presence on or near
campus. In collaboration with Intel, Carnegie Mellon has pioneered research into claytronics
. [ 123 ] International activities In addition to its Pittsburgh campus, Carnegie
Mellon has a branch campus in the Middle East, Carnegie Mellon University in Qatar
, which offers a full undergraduate curriculum with degree programs in computer science,
business administration, biology, computational biology, and information systems.
The campus is located in Doha 's Education City which is home to multiple other U.
S. universities all of which are funded by the Qatar Foundation . The Qatari campus
has been the subject of controversy, as Islamic cultural values and laws in Qatar
differ greatly from the core values of Carnegie Mellon. [ 124 ] Additionally, Carnegie
Mellon and other U. S. universities in Education City have been criticized for being
essentially complicit in Qatar's corruption, connections with Hamas and their questionable
human rights record by continuing to operate there. [ 124 ] [ 125 ] [ 126 ] [ 127
] It also has graduate-level extension campuses in Mountain View, California in the
heart of Silicon Valley (offering masters programs in Software Engineering and Software
Management). The Tepper School of Business maintains a satellite center in downtown
Manhattan and the Heinz College maintains one in Adelaide , Australia. The Heinz College