were originally roofed with green Ludowici Spanish tile. [ 35 ] There was little change
to the campus between the first and second World War . A 1938 master plan by Githens
and Keally suggested acquisition of new land along Forbes Avenue , but the plan was
not fully implemented. The period starting with the construction of the Hall of the
Arts building (former home of the Graduate School of Industrial Administration) in
1952 and ending with Wean Hall in 1971 saw the institutional change from Carnegie
Institute of Technology to Carnegie Mellon University. Around this time an expanding
student population demanded improved facilities for student life, athletics and libraries.
The campus expanded to Forbes Avenue from its original land along Schenley Park .
The buildings of this era reflected contemporary architectural styles. The International
Style , with its rejection of historical tradition and its emphases on functionalism
and expression of structure, had been in vogue in European settings since the 1930s.
It came late to the Carnegie Mellon campus because of the hiatus in building activity
and a general reluctance among American universities to abandon historical styles.
By the 1960s, the International Style was adopted to accomplish needed expansion quickly
and affordably with the swelling of student ranks in the aftermath of the GI Bill
in 1944. Each building was a unique architectural statement that may have acknowledged
the existing campus in its placement, but not in its form or materials. Starting in
the 1990s the university built a new university center (Cohon University Center),
theater and drama building (Purnell Center for the Arts), business school building
( Tepper School of Business ), and several dormitories. Baker Hall was renovated in
the early 2000s, and new chemistry labs were established in Doherty Hall soon after.
Several computer science buildings, such as Newell-Simon Hall , also were established,
renovated or renamed in the early 2000s. In 2006, Carnegie Mellon Trustee Jill Gansman
Kraus donated the 80-foot (24 m)-tall sculpture Walking to the Sky , which was placed
on the lawn facing Forbes Avenue between the Cohon University Center and Warner Hall.
The sculpture was controversial for its placement, the general lack of input from
the campus community, and its (lack of) aesthetic appeal. [ 37 ] The Gates Hillman
Complex opened for occupancy on August 7, 2009. [ 38 ] It sits on a 5. 6-acre (2.
3 ha) site on the university's West Campus, surrounded by Cyert Hall, the Purnell
Center for the Arts, Doherty Hall, Newell-Simon Hall, Smith Hall, Hamburg Hall , and
the Robert Mehrabian Collaborative Innovation Center. It contains 318 offices as well
as labs, computer clusters , lecture halls, classrooms and a 255-seat auditorium.
The Gates Hillman Complex was made possible by a $20 million lead gift from the Gates
Foundation and an additional $10 million grant from the Henry L. Hillman Foundation
. The Gates Hillman Complex and the Purnell Center for the Arts are connected by the