– (aka Chipped Chopped Ham) thinly sliced processed ham, from Isaly's since 1933.
City Chicken – cubes of pork and/or veal baked or fried on a wooden skewer. Clark
Bar – chocolate candy bar; developed in the city in 1917. Essie's Original Hot Dog
shop - an Oakland staple since 1960. Closed permanently in 2020 amidst the Covid-19
pandemic. Halušky – noodles with fried cabbage (Polish), or cottage cheese (Slovak).
Iron City Beer – native brew; with a shot of whiskey, a boilermaker ; with a shot
of Imperial, an imp-n-arn. Italian sausage – with grilled peppers and onions. Kielbasa
– eastern European sausages. Pepperoni roll - an Italian American snack made of soft
white bread with pepperoni and cheese in the middle. Various shops in the Strip District
as well as Giant Eagle sell this snack in Pittsburgh. Pierogi – Polish dish, pasta
dough filled with potato and cheese, onion or sauerkraut. Primanti Brothers – sandwich
with fries and coleslaw in it. Sarris Candies - chocolates and ice cream originating
in Canonsburg Teutonia Männerchor - Deutschtown (East Allegheny) German food . Wholey's
– Founded in 1912 in Pittsburgh's market square and now located on Penn Ave; Wholey's
serves a wide variety of seafood and a famous fish sandwich. The Wholey company has
been the anchor and main attraction of the historic "strip District" for over 60 years.
Restaurants/nightlife Pittsburgh is home to several night spots. In addition to numerous
large and small neighborhood parks, Pittsburgh has five large city parks covering
hundreds of acres: Several other parks and gardens are in Pittsburgh: The city has
an extensive library system, both public and university. Most notable are the Carnegie
Library of Pittsburgh and the University of Pittsburgh 's University Library System.
Many local history materials are available on-line at Historic Pittsburgh , a collection
that includes materials from the University of Pittsburgh 's University Library System,
the Library & Archives of the Historical Society of Western Pennsylvania at the Senator
John Heinz Pittsburgh Regional History Center , and the Carnegie Museum of Art . Pittsburgh
History is an on-line service maintained by the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh. With
the leadership of native Samuel Hazo the city hosted a poetry forum. [ 3 ] Pittsburgh
is also renown for its deep and enduring literary culture. [ 4 ] Pittsburgh literary
history goes back to the early 20th century, with dozens of prominent authors, the
city for a time was considered more closely identified with literature than with steel.
[ 5 ] The Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra performs in Heinz Hall , which also plays
host to other events throughout the year. The Benedum Center and Heinz Hall provide
venues for numerous musicals, lectures, speeches, and other performances, including
Pittsburgh Opera . Pittsburgh is also home to one of the few professional brass bands
in the world, the River City Brass Band . Other musical arts groups include the Pittsburgh