United States historic place Carnegie Museums of Pittsburgh is a nonprofit organization
that operates four museums in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania, United States. The organization
is headquartered in the Carnegie Institute and Library complex in the Oakland neighborhood
of Pittsburgh. The Carnegie Institute complex, which includes the original museum,
recital hall, and library, was added to the National Register of Historic Places on
March 30, 1979. Two of the Carnegie museums, the Carnegie Museum of Natural History
and the Carnegie Museum of Art , are both located in the Carnegie Institute and Library
complex in Oakland, a landmark building listed on the National Register of Historic
Places (ref #79002158, added 1979). It also houses the Carnegie Music Hall and the
main branch of the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh . [ 3 ] Andrew Carnegie donated
the library and the buildings. With the goal of inspiring people to do good for themselves
and their communities, the terms for donations required communities to support them
in exchange for the building and initial investment by Carnegie. The words "free to
the people" inscribed above the entrance of the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh illustrate
his vision. [ 4 ] The other two museums, The Andy Warhol Museum and the Kamin Science
Center , are located in separate facilities on Pittsburgh's North Shore . [ 5 ] Opened
on May 15, 1994, the Andy Warhol Museum is the first museum to exclusively focus on
an American postwar artist. [ 6 ] The building which houses the Andy Warhol Museum
was originally built in 1911 for industrial purposes, but was redesigned for the museum
by architect Richard Gluckman . The museum currently has seven floors of gallery and
exhibition space as well as an underground education studio and conservation lab.
[ 7 ] Warhol's primary artistic technique was silkscreen pop art, which he gained
notoriety for in the early 1960s. The serial images derived from the culture's consumerism
and conception of beauty are reified in a form of art which represent the identity
of constituents in postwar American society. [ 8 ] Images used by Warhol, which have
made him famous for his contributions to pop art , include celebrities and consumables
such as Marilyn Monroe and The Campbell's soup can . The museum's collection includes
over 4, 000 Warhol art works in all media —paintings, drawings, prints , photographs,