The Stockholm Prize in Criminology is an international prize in the field of criminology, established under the aegis of the Swedish Ministry of Justice. It has a permanent endowment in the trust of the Stockholm Prize in Criminology Foundation. The Stockholm Prize in Criminology is a distinguished part of the Stockholm Criminology Symposium, an annual event taking place during three days in June.

The prize is awarded for outstanding achievements in criminological research or for the reduction of crime and the advancement of human rights.

The objectives of the Stockholm Prize in Criminology are to promote the development of:

According to reputation surveys conducted in 2013-2014 and 2018, the Stockholm Prize in Criminology is the most prestigious international academic award in the field of law.[2][3][4]

The Stockholm Prize in Criminology was presented for the first time in June 2006. The Prize sum amounts to 1,000,00 SEK and is awarded to one recipient annually, with the possibility of the prize being shared among up to two co-recipients. Each year, the independent Stockholm Prize Jury invites nominating bodies from around the world to suggest candidates for the prize. The Jury consists of members from five continents representing both practitioners and academics. The Stockholm Prize in Criminology is awarded by the Stockholm Prize in Criminology Foundation in cooperation with Stockholm University and the Swedish National Council for Crime Prevention (Brå).[5]

The Stockholm Criminology Symposium is an annual event which attracts some 500 attendees from all over the world. The Symposium is organized by the Swedish National Council for Crime Prevention on behalf of the Swedish government. During its thirteen-year long existence the Symposium has become a meeting point for researchers, policy-makers and practitioners who want to learn from the latest research findings of importance for crime policy.[6]

The Prize ceremony is held at the City Hall in central Stockholm in conjunction with the Stockholm Criminology symposium. The 2020 ceremony will be held on the evening of June 10 and is followed by a gala dinner in the Golden Hall.[7]

The first Stockholm Prize in Criminology was awarded in 2006. So far thirty scholars have received the prize:[8]

The international independent jury consists of members representing both practitioners and academics. Today the Jury consists of following:

[9]

Initially, the Stockholm Prize in Criminology was financed through yearly private donations. However, given its success, and in order to secure its long-term financial viability, the Swedish Ministry of Justice and the Torsten Söderberg Foundation jointly decided to found a permanent, independent Foundation, the Stockholm Prize in Criminology Foundation. A major official grant was approved by the Swedish Riksdag in December 2011. The Torsten Söderberg Foundation, with the support of the Ragnar Söderberg Foundation, generously provided the necessary matching funds, as well as subsequent additional donations. The Jerry Lee Foundation, original donor to the Stockholm Criminology Prize, as well as the Tokyo-based Hitachi Mirai Foundation continued their support for the Prize as co-founders to the new Stockholm Prize in Criminology Foundation. Regular support is also received from the Japanese Correctional Association.[10][11]

The Torsten Söderberg Foundation, founded in 1960 by Torsten and Wanja Söderberg and their sons, is dedicated to promoting scientific research and educational programs, primarily within the fields of economy, medicine and jurisprudence. Over the past ten years, the foundation has on average awarded grants in surplus of 100 million SEK per year. The donations to the Stockholm Prize in Criminology Foundation have been made in honour of Med. Dr h.c. Edvard Söderberg.[12]

The Jerry Lee Foundation is dedicated primarily to reducing crime and enhancing education through research on what works to achieve these goals. The foundation is committed to solving social problems associated with poverty, especially in American inner cities that suffer from concentrated poverty. The foundation’s special concerns are elementary education and crime.

The Hitachi Mirai Foundation is engaged in a wide range of activities including the prevention of juvenile crime and delinquency, the enhancement of correctional and rehabilitation services for prison inmates and reform school students, and the promotion of social understanding and cooperation on issues involving young people.

Japanese Correctional Association is a Tokyo-based Public Interest Incorporated Foundation, committed to the public welfare activities. Their objectives are prevention of crime and delinquency through enlightenment of the general public on idea of correction and rehabilitation of offenders.[13]

More information about the prize founders and donors is available on our website
