Licancabur is a prominent, 5,916-metre-high (19,409 ft) stratovolcano on the Bolivia–Chile border in the Central Volcanic Zone of the Andes. It is capped by a 400–500-metre (1,300–1,600 ft) wide summit crater which contains Licancabur Lake, a crater lake that is among the highest lakes in the world. There are no glaciers owing to the arid climate. Numerous plant and animal species live on the mountain. The volcanoes Sairecabur and Juriques are north and east of Licancabur, respectively. Licancabur formed on top of ignimbrites produced by other volcanoes and was active during the Holocene. Although no historical eruptions of the volcano are known, lava flows extending into Laguna Verde have been dated to 13,240 ± 100 before present and there may be residual heat in the mountain. The volcano has primarily erupted andesite, with small amounts of dacite and basaltic andesite. Several archaeological sites have been found on the mountain, possibly constructed by the Inca or Atacama people. (Full article...)

October 7: First day of Sukkot (Judaism, 2025)

The Nobel Prize in Physics is an annual award given by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences to those who have made the most outstanding contributions to humanity through physics. It is widely regarded as the most prestigious award that a scientist can receive in that field. One of the five Nobel Prizes established by the will of Alfred Nobel in 1895, the Nobel Prize in Physics has been awarded since 1901, when the German physicist Wilhelm Röntgen was recognised for the discovery of X-rays. As of 2025, there have been 229 Nobel laureates in physics. The prize consists of a medal (whose obverse bears a profile of Nobel), a diploma, and a monetary award. This 1931 group photograph includes three Nobel laureates in physics in the front row – from left to right, Albert A. Michelson (1907), Albert Einstein (1921), and Robert Millikan (1923) – each of whom autographed the image. The photograph is in the collection of the Dibner Library of the History of Science and Technology at the Smithsonian Institution.

Photograph credit: unknown; scanned by the Smithsonian Institution; restored by Bammesk
Wikipedia is written by volunteer editors and hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization that also hosts a range of other volunteer projects:

This Wikipedia is written in English. Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the largest are listed below.
