On-Street Services
The Clean, Outreach, and Hospitality programs are some of the most visible and highly acclaimed initiatives of the Pittsburgh Downtown Partnership.
Our On-Street Services Team provides a very visible, uniformed, friendly and welcoming presence in our district. They help keep Downtown Pittsburgh’s sidewalks and streets free of litter and debris, greet pedestrians and complement the presence of the Pittsburgh Police by being eyes and ears on the ground.
Of course, keeping our Downtown neighborhood clean and safe is a shared responsibility, and we work with local property owners, merchants and partners like the Department of Public Works, Pittsburgh School District police and the Port Authority to help maintain a cohesive effort.
Clean Team
The PDP Clean Team is well-traveled in its efforts to keep Downtown clean. With their signature yellow uniforms, our team members walk a combined 12,000 miles annually, removing trash from the sidewalks, emptying and cleaning trash cans and cigarette receptacles, removing graffiti and handbills, and power-washing sidewalks and alleyways.
They work seven days a week all year long beautifying Downtown and complementing the work of Pittsburgh’s Department of Public Works.
We are also enthusiastic about a partnership that began in 2017 with Renewal Inc. , a local workforce development program that assists people coming out of the criminal justice system.
Outreach Team
The PDP Outreach Team focuses on addressing and managing panhandling and homeless issues Downtown. Outreach Ambassadors are specially trained to deal with the social circumstances surrounding these issues.
Outreach Team members are responsible for providing a visible uniformed presence, interacting with panhandlers and homeless persons, and connecting them with the local social service outreach programs, organizations, and agencies within the boundaries of Downtown’s Business Improvement District. Our Outreach Ambassadors are always approachable, helpful, and non-judgmental.
Golden Triangle Ambassador Program
The Golden Triangle Ambassador program was created by the Pittsburgh Downtown Partnership and is operated by Block by Block with funding from the City of Pittsburgh and community partners.
This trained team work in shifts seven days a week, between 7 a.m. and 11 p.m., to deliver hospitality and public assistance, walking and biking patrols, monitoring, reporting, engagement with the street population, event support, and expanded outreach with local businesses.
The PDP is extremely grateful for the commitment and support of business and program partners who were instrumental in the launch of our Golden Triangle Ambassador program:
Benter Foundation
Buchanan Ingersoll
Buhl Foundation
Calgon Carbon
Citizens
City of Pittsburgh
Duquesne Light
Eden Hall Foundation
Giant Eagle
Highmark
Huntington
Koppers Inc.
Peoples Gas
PITT OHIO
PNC
PPG
University of Pittsburgh
UPMC
Additional information:
City of Pittsburgh Ordinances: click here to learn the rules about trash removal, snow and ice removal, posting signs, and more
For more information about picking up litter in your neighborhood, visit www.citizensagainstlitter.org
Call or text Dispatch: (412) 855-6903 or email: dispatch@downtownpittsburgh.com Monday through Sunday, 7:00am – 11:00pm For Emergencies, please call 911.  For Police Non-Emergencies, please call 311.
Downtown Community Forums
Learn more about the efforts to ensure Downtown remains a great place to live, work, and play at quarterly community meetings .