Mobility & Transportation
The PDP’s work in Transportation is an integral part of making Downtown more efficient and manageable, making it easier to get into and around Downtown Pittsburgh by enhancing mobility choices.
The PDP is a Transportation Management Association (TMA), one of three in the Pittsburgh region. Through the TMA, we endeavor to improve access to and around Downtown for motorists, transit riders, bicyclists and pedestrians with a focus on safety issues and encouragement of multi-modal transportation.
Initiatives
The PDP pursues transportation initiatives related to providing Pittsburghers with transportation choices other than cars and ones that ease traffic congestion. These initiatives take the form of programming that is made available to the public or is project-specific or is a collaborative project. The PDP’s role is to represent the interests of the Downtown business community and other Downtown stakeholders.
Transportation Advocacy The Pittsburgh Downtown Partnership advocates on behalf of issues relating to Downtown development and transportation. PDP research has identified public transit as key to Downtown’s economy. As a result,the PDP has focused advocacy efforts on transportation funding statewide and public transit funding locally. Advocacy efforts take the form of letters to the editor, emails, social media messaging and collaboration with partner organizations.
Bicycling Initiatives The PDP works with the biking community to improve bike infrastructure and options in Downtown. The PDP and Bike Pittsburgh worked together to design, manufacture and install the signature Three Rivers bike racks that can be seen throughout Downtown. The PDP is working with the Bike Share program to identify locations for bike stations and worked with City Planning and Downtown Stakeholders on the implementation of the Downtown’s first bike lane on Penn Avenue.
Wayfinding One issue that resonates with visitors and newcomers to Pittsburgh is the lack of a complete and attractive wayfinding system. The PDP is currently collaborating with stakeholders from the North Side/North Shore, Oakland, Downtown, and the City of Pittsburgh to develop and implement a wayfinding system for all three neighborhoods that could serve as a template for other city neighborhoods.
Learn more about the Downtown Pedestrian Wayfinding Project
Downtown Street Guides!
View and download our free guides below for helpful tips and info about navigating Downtown streets!