Natalie Wood (born July 20, 1938, San Francisco , California , U.S.—died November 29, 1981, off Santa Catalina Island, California) was an American film actress who transitioned from child stardom to a successful movie career as an adult. She was best known for ingenue roles that traded on her youthful appeal.
Zacharenko was born to Russian immigrant parents. She began appearing in movies at age five and received her first credit, as Natalie Wood, in the drama Tomorrow Is Forever (1946). She won particular acclaim for her role as a precocious Santa Claus skeptic in Miracle on 34th Street (1947) when she was only eight. Emerging as a dark-haired beauty in her teenage years, Wood moved into leading roles with Rebel Without a Cause (1955), in which she earned an Academy Award nomination for her portrayal of a troubled young woman. She married actor Robert Wagner in 1957 (divorced 1962; remarried 1972) and the following year starred opposite Gene Kelly in Marjorie Morningstar .
In 1961 Wood cemented her reputation as one of Hollywood’s most likeable and sought-after stars with appearances in two high-profile films. In Splendor in the Grass , she portrayed a small-town young woman distraught over a romantic relationship; for the emotional role, she was again nominated for an Oscar. She then starred as Maria in the hit film adaptation of the musical West Side Story . After another musical film , Gypsy (1962), Wood landed roles in the modern romances Love with the Proper Stranger (1963), for which she scored a third Oscar nomination, and Sex and the Single Girl (1964), in which she portrayed writer Helen Gurley Brown . Several box-office disappointments followed, however—including the show-business drama Inside Daisy Clover (1965)—and she spent three years away from the camera.
Britannica Quiz
Best Picture Movie Quote Quiz
Wood staged a comeback with the popular sex comedy Bob & Carol & Ted & Alice (1969), but she acted only sporadically thereafter, with the television movie Cat on a Hot Tin Roof (1976) and the miniseries From Here to Eternity (1979) providing her most notable performances. She won a Golden Globe Award for the latter.
In 1981, while vacationing with Wagner and actor Christopher Walken on a yacht off the coast of Santa Catalina Island , California, Wood drowned under mysterious circumstances. For years the cause of her death was classified on her death certificate as an accident, but in 2012 it was formally changed to “undetermined” following a renewed investigation into the case, and in 2018 it was further reclassified as being a “suspicious death.” The TV documentary Natalie Wood: What Remains Behind (2020) included an interview with Wagner, who denied any involvement in Wood’s death.