Tragic childhood
The artist was the first child of Fermo Merisi and his second wife, Lucia Aratori. He was born in the autumn of 1571, probably in the small town of Caravaggio in the diocese of Cremona , after which he would later come to be named. His Christian name of Michelangelo suggests that his exact birth date was September 29, the feast day of the Archangel Michael . Despite assertions by Giulio Mancini, author of one of the earliest biographies of Caravaggio, that the artist’s father was majordomo and architect to the powerful Francesco Sforza I, marchese of Caravaggio, the historical record reveals a more humble truth. Fermo Merisi was no architect but a simple stonemason who is referred to in documents of the time as a mastro : a qualified artisan entitled to run a workshop and hire apprentices. The artist’s family did have connections with the local nobility but only on Caravaggio’s mother’s side. His maternal grandfather, Giovan Giacomo Aratori, was a land surveyor who acted directly as an agent for Francesco Sforza I, serving as a legal witness for the Sforza family and collecting rents on their behalf. Aratori’s daughter, Margarita, Caravaggio’s maternal aunt, was wet nurse to the children of Francesco Sforza I and his wife, Costanza Colonna, marchesa of Caravaggio. The Sforza and Colonna were among the most powerful and influential dynasties in Italy . Caravaggio’s connections to them would prove vitally important to him in later life. Costanza Colonna, in particular, would be a constant support during his most troubled years, giving him refuge and shielding him from justice when he was a wanted man.
The artist’s early life was divided between his native town of Caravaggio and the populous city of Milan, where his father had a workshop. In the summer of 1576, Milan was struck by an outbreak of bubonic plague . According to the city’s parish census of that year, the artist, then about five years old, and his family still resided there. By the autumn of the following year, and probably before then, they had moved back to Caravaggio to escape the plague, which had reached epidemic proportions, ultimately accounting for the lives of one-fifth of the local population. But they fled in vain. A series of documents in the archives of Caravaggio records the death, in the second half of 1577, of Caravaggio’s father, his paternal grandfather and grandmother, and his uncle, Pietro. By age six, Caravaggio had lost almost every male member of his family to the plague. His unruly and fiery temperament and his deep sense of abandonment may well have their origins in those traumatic events of his early childhood.
Britannica Quiz
Ultimate Art Quiz
Documentary evidence concerning the rest of Caravaggio’s childhood and formative years is scant. On April 6, 1584, at age 12, he signed a contract of apprenticeship with a minor Milanese master, Simone Peterzano. But given Peterzano’s expertise in fresco painting , a technique that Caravaggio never mastered, it seems unlikely that he paid more than a rudimentary attention to his studies. Such fragmentary evidence as there is suggests a misspent youth, during which the future painter most certainly mastered the art of swordsmanship—he would later prove himself an expert duelist—and got into trouble with the law.