Social Media Guidelines
As a manager of an official Carnegie Mellon-affiliated social media account, you are speaking on behalf of the university. We ask that you adhere to the following guidelines to ensure the best experience for our audience. These guidelines should be applied to all channels affiliated with Carnegie Mellon.
For questions, comments or concerns, contact the director of social media, at social@andrew.cmu.edu .
Get in Touch
Whether you currently manage an official CMU-affiliated social media account, are considering creating one or your college, department or program, or are a faculty or staff member looking to use social media personally, contact the director of social media, at social@andrew.cmu.edu . The university social media team can provide advice on appropriate channels and best practices and assist you in getting started, as well as help you leverage your new channel by sharing it among our audiences.
Who You Are
Carnegie Mellon's schools, departments, programs and centers vary in missions, but they're all part of the larger institution — Carnegie Mellon University. When naming your social media page, be sure to include Carnegie Mellon University, Carnegie Mellon or CMU, as space allows. If the full "Carnegie Mellon University" doesn't fit as the page or account name, be sure to include it in the description area. If you would like to try a new animation, graphic, video filter, etc., refer to our Visual Identity guidelines and Photo & Video best practices.
If you have any questions, contact the University Communications & Marketing brand manager at 412-268-9523 or marketing-info@andrew.cmu.edu .
Managing a CMU-Affiliated Account
Be #TartanProud if you manage an official Carnegie Mellon University-affiliated social media account, but remember, that comes with a lot of responsibility. The following applies to all employees of CMU who manage an official university-affiliated social media account.
If you’re new to managing an official CMU-affiliated social media account, or if your college, department or unit is considering creating a new account, contact the director of social media, at social@andrew.cmu.edu .
Using SOcial Media Personally
If you use social media on a professional or personal basis, keep in mind that even if you haven't included a reference to CMU in your bios, you may still be recognized as an employee and represent the university.
Official CMU-affiliated social media accounts can be found in the university’s Social Media Directory .
To be included in the directory, accounts must:
Represent an official Carnegie Mellon school, college, department or program. Student organizations are not listed there at this time.
Meet university branding and social media guidelines.
Be active within the last six months.
Visit The Bridge to discover unique opportunities at Carnegie Mellon, search events, student organizations and news articles.