City Planning Meeting Calendar
The Department of City Planning (DCP) facilitates a number of Public Meetings, Boards, Commissions, Panels, and Development Activities Meetings (DAMs) which review zoning variances and elements of development, design, public art, historic preservation, and legislation related to the Zoning Code and Historic Preservation.
Agendas and meeting material are linked within each meeting shown on the calendar. Use the search bar at the top of the page to search for a specific OneStopPGH record number, project address, or legislation.
For 2024 and earlier meetings, please visit City Planning's YouTube Channel. For 2024 and earlier meeting minutes, please visit City Planning's Boards and Commissions page. All DAM reports prior to January 1, 2025, are archived and available on the .
Please wait while we load this calendar...
Related Meeting Information
Meeting Location
City Planning Board and Commission Meetings are held in-person, hosted virtually on Zoom, and streamed live on YouTube.
In-person : Lower Level Hearing Room, 412 Boulevard of the Allies, Pittsburgh, PA 15219
To join via Zoom : see meeting link in the Meeting and Contact Information Table
To stream the meeting live : visit the Pittsburgh City Planning YouTube page
Development Activities Meeting (DAM) locations are Neighborhood specific. Please refer to the Meeting invite for location information.
How to Provide Public Testimony
Members of the public have multiple ways to comment on Hearing and Action meeting agenda items. You can:
Email City Planning staff . Email testimony will be accepted until the business day before the meeting at 12 p.m.
See contact email information in the Meeting and Contact Information table.
Send a letter to 412 Boulevard of the Allies, Suite 201, Pittsburgh, PA 15219. Mailed testimony must be received by two business days before the meeting.
Please note that written testimony is not read into the meeting record.
Public testimony can be provided in-person at 412 Boulevard of the Allies, Lower Level Hearing Room or via Zoom.
If providing testimony in-person , follow the Commission instructions to queue.
If providing testimony via Zoom : Join the virtual meeting and use the raise hand function to speak Call into the meeting on your phone and use the raise hand function by pressing *9 City Planning staff will announce your name. When ready, please state and spell your name for the Court Reporter. Each speaker is provided with 3 minutes for public testimony.
Join the virtual meeting and use the raise hand function to speak
Call into the meeting on your phone and use the raise hand function by pressing *9
City Planning staff will announce your name. When ready, please state and spell your name for the Court Reporter.
Each speaker is provided with 3 minutes for public testimony.
If you are not planning to testify, please watch the YouTube Live stream to allow those testifying to be able to join the meeting.
Meeting and Contact Information Table
ADA Assistance
Anyone who requires an accommodation for effective communication or a modification of policies or procedures to participate in a program, service, or activity provided by the City of Pittsburgh should contact the City ADA Coordinator as soon as possible but no later than two business days before the event.
Please email the ADA Coordinator at ada@pittsburghpa.gov
Search all City of Pittsburgh Meetings
Use the search below to select meeting type, year or keyword. You can also check the "Get updates for this search" to be notified via email of new meeting entries added to the city meeting list. Please be advised that City Council meetings are not listed below. You can find current and future Council meeting info here .