Conquer your challenges and connect with the best and the brightest faculty from around the world. At CMU, our community collaborates with no boundaries across our seven colleges and hundreds of disciplines to create powerful innovation that transforms industries.
Heinz College of Information Systems and Public Policy
Bringing together the power of its School of Public Policy and Management and School of Information Systems and Management, Heinz College connects data analytics, technology and experiential learning — addressing industry problems with technically-focused solutions.
Work with Heinz on projects that incorporate AI tools as they apply to data mining, data structures, customized technology solutions, predictive models, customer journey and consumer analytics, health care technologies, fintech tools and distributed systems, and RPA in logistics and cloud services.
College of Engineering
With an ingrained “maker” culture, coupled with future-forward additive manufacturing education and research in the Next Manufacturing Center, the College of Engineering builds creative and technically strong engineers who shape novel and unprecedented solutions to problems of scientific and practical importance.
Programs for partnership include the Integrated Innovation Institute, biomedical engineering, robotics systems and internet of things, mechanical engineering, design of machine elements, electrical and computer engineering, advanced control system integration and robot design and experimentation.
Mellon College of Science
The Mellon College of Science comprises the biological sciences, chemistry, mathematical sciences and physics departments and makes advances with a lasting impact on foundational knowledge and critical global challenges like sustainability, health and quality of life.
The college approaches scientific problems from fresh angles using innovative and interdisciplinary approaches by harnessing internationally recognized minds in polymer science, cosmology, mathematical finance and neuroscience among many others.
College of Fine Arts
By shaping and enriching human lives through innovation, expression and creation, the College of Fine Arts merges technology and imagination in the college’s Schools of Architecture, Art, Design, Drama and Music.
Internationally recognized artists and professionals guide graduate and undergraduate students on ways to frame problems, construct solutions, challenge audiences and celebrate humanity by bridging the arts and sciences like nowhere else.
School of Computer Science
As the inventors of computer science and artificial intelligence, CMU has pioneered technologies in fields ranging from computer speech and vision to search engines and human-computer interaction . The School of Computer Science continues to be a disciplinary leader with breakthrough discoveries that improve the way people learn, live and work.
Partner with the School of Computer Science in the areas of computational data science, intelligent information systems, artificial intelligence and innovation, computer vision, robotics systems development, systems or privacy engineering, product management, human-computer interaction and more.
Tepper School of Business
With a data-driven approach to problem-solving and the entrepreneurial spirit to offer future-focused solutions tailored for the complexity of today’s marketplace, the Tepper School of Business has the expertise and resources to bring promising ideas to the global marketplace.
Engage with Tepper faculty and students on projects surrounding energy business, technology strategy and product management, business analytics, strategic management of the enterprise and more.