We Provide For You
Each student has access to our extensive software catalog, which includes:
Productivity software , like Microsoft Office and Google Workspace for Education
Collaboration software , like Box, Google Chat, and Zoom
Program-specific software that your instructors may require
Some software applications can be downloaded to your personal computer, while others are only available in computer labs or through Virtual Andrew or Timeshare Linux .
Before you arrive, installing VPN and Microsoft Office on your computer is a good idea. You can also set up campus printing .
Students also have free access to LinkedIn Learning , a platform that offers thousands of short training videos on topics ranging from programming languages to strategic thinking and more.
As a CMU student, you’re almost always just a few steps away from a campus printer that you can use from your computer or mobile device.
Visit any of our Windows, Mac, or Linux computer labs 24/7 to access an extensive selection of software.
You May Need to Buy
CMU does not provide personal computers. Before you purchase one, check with your school to learn the hardware and software specifications required to complete your coursework.
Some schools have their own requirements, including:
Even if your school isn’t listed above, always check with your advisor before you buy!
If your school doesn’t provide specifications requirements, we recommend a Mac or PC that meets the specifications listed below.
Students are eligible for an educational discount on computers purchased through the CMU Tech Store. Contact them with any questions.
Mac
Recommended OS
macOS 14 (Sonoma) or macOS 13 (Sequoia)
Processor*
Apple Silicon (M1, M1 Pro, etc.)
RAM
8 GB
Hard Drive
512 GB SSD
*Note: Mac computers with Apple Silicon M series processors cannot run Windows software through Boot Camp or VMware Fusion. If you have a Mac with either of these processors, you can still access supported applications through Virtual Andrew .
Click Apple > About and look for Chip to determine the processor installed in your machine.
Windows
Processor
Core 5 2.4 GHz Note : Snapdragon or ARM processors are not supported.
RAM
16 GB
Hard Drive
512 GB SSD
IMPORTANT : After October 14, 2025, Windows 10 will stop receiving support and free software updates . We recommend upgrading to Windows 11 .