September 3, 2024 Download as a PDF
Pittsburgh Opera presents drama, intrigue, murder and more this fall
Pittsburgh Opera kicks off its 2024–25 Season with drama, intrigue, murder, and more.
From Puccini’s whirlwind thriller Tosca and the adulterous double feature Cavalleria Rusticana/Pagliacci to free concerts and festive events, Pittsburgh Opera offers world-class operatic entertainment this fall for every taste and price point.
Pittsburgh Opera strives to make opera accessible to all, and its autumn events present plenty of avenues to enjoyment.
Fall 2024 Highlights:
Resident Artist Welcome Party
Sunday, September 8
Ingram, PA
Free - Rising Stars Concert
Free - Concerts at Market Square Farmers Market
Thursday, September 19 and Thursday, September 26
Market Square, downtown Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh Opera New Guard Summer Salon
Thursday, September 19
Hotel Indigo (Oakland) - Rooftop Terrace
“An Overture” – the 69 th Annual Diamond Horseshoe Celebration
Saturday, September 28
Bitz Opera Factory
Tosca
Music by Giacomo Puccini; libretto by Luigi Illica and Giuseppe Giacosa
Benedum Center for the Performing Arts
October 5, 8, 11, 13, 2024
Free - Song Shop Concerts
Saturday, October 19 and November 23, 12:00 PM
Bitz Opera Factory
Cavalleria Rusticana/Pagliacci
Music by Pietro Mascagni with a libretto by Guido Menasci and Giovanni Targioni-Tozzetti (Cavalleria); Music and libretto by Ruggero Leoncavallo (Pagliacci)
Benedum Center for the Performing Arts
November 9, 12, 15, 17, 2024
For a complete set of listings and event details, view this PDF or see our Events Calendar .
Sponsorships
Pittsburgh Opera’s season is made possible, onstage and off, by support from all corners of the community.
PNC is Pittsburgh Opera’s 2024–25 Season Sponsor.
PNC is Pittsburgh Opera’s 2024–25 Season Sponsor.
WQED-FM is Pittsburgh Opera’s Media Sponsor.
WQED-FM is Pittsburgh Opera’s Media Sponsor.
Ambridge Regional Distribution and Manufacturing Center is the Tuesday performance and ‘Meet the Artists’ post-show event sponsor.
Ambridge Regional Distribution and Manufacturing Center is the Tuesday performance and ‘Meet the Artists’ post-show event sponsor.
Natural Awakenings Magazine is the Song Shop Concerts sponsor.
Natural Awakenings Magazine is the Song Shop Concerts sponsor.
Pittsburgh Opera offers a range of flexible gift options and potential tax benefits for individuals, local businesses, and corporations. Sponsorship opportunities include:
Production Sponsorships – Help bring a production to life while pulling back the curtain and entertaining clients or friends. Gifts begin at $25,000.
Production Sponsorships – Help bring a production to life while pulling back the curtain and entertaining clients or friends. Gifts begin at $25,000.
Resident Artist Sponsorships – Support future opera stars while building personal relationships with artists. Gifts begin at $10,000.
Resident Artist Sponsorships – Support future opera stars while building personal relationships with artists. Gifts begin at $10,000.
Family Day & Community Programs – Underwrite free or low-cost concerts, because everyone deserves access to opera. Gifts begin at $5,000.
Family Day & Community Programs – Underwrite free or low-cost concerts, because everyone deserves access to opera. Gifts begin at $5,000.
Parties & Events – Sponsor Galas, networking events, parties, and happy hours. Gifts begin at $1,000.
Parties & Events – Sponsor Galas, networking events, parties, and happy hours. Gifts begin at $1,000.
To learn more about becoming a sponsor, contact Pittsburgh Opera at 412-281-0912 x226.