Developer Resources
The PDP works with other organizations and stakeholders to provide support to investors and developers to keep Downtown thriving. The following resources are meant to help navigate and assist in the development process.
Additionally, we publish a monthly development newsletter that features information relevant to property owners, prospective developers, and more.
Incentives and Assistance
Paris to Pittsburgh The PDP’s façade and outdoor dining activation matching grant program helps property and business owners improve the appearance of Downtown. Go to the Paris to Pittsburgh page for more information.
Urban Redevelopment Authority The Urban Redevelopment Authority of Pittsburgh (URA) is the City of Pittsburgh’s economic development agency, is behind many Pittsburgh development initiatives, large and small. The URA is committed to creating jobs, expanding the City’s tax base and improving the vitality of businesses and neighborhoods. To achieve this, the URA assembles, prepares and conveys sites for major mixed-use developments. It also provides a portfolio of programs that include financing for business location, relocation and expansion, housing construction and rehabilitation, and home purchases and improvements. Learn more about the URA here .
Landmarks Community Capital Corporation Affordable financing to help business and building owners improve their historic buildings and interior space is now available through a grant from the Colcom Foundation to establish the Downtown Retail and Historic Buildings Loan Program at Landmarks Community Capital Corporation.
Learn more about the Downtown Retail and Historic Building Loan Program here .
City Ordinances and Taxes
Doing business in Downtown Pittsburgh requires an understanding of City of Pittsburgh ordinances and taxes. Whether pertaining to trash and snow removal, vending, or various tax requirements like wage, EMS and parking, it helps to know the rules if you’re expected to follow them.
Click here for City ordinances.
Click here for City tax forms.