Do you have a child who can’t stop singing along with their favorite songs?
Does your child love to design, draw, and create?
Is your child interested in the magic that goes on backstage of a performance?
Then Bravo Academy is for YOU!
If you are an aspiring young singer, have a talent for creating the magic of the backstage world, or are a budding opera aficionado, this is the program for you! Focusing on musical theater, opera, and art song favorites, Bravo Academy ensures that all participants will have a chance to shine in the limelight.
Designed for ages 11-15 and held in Pittsburgh Opera’s headquarters and professional performance space the Bitz Opera Factory, Bravo Academy offers two, 1-week programs ( 9:30 am – 4:00 pm ) where participants receive invaluable hands-on experiences with leading industry professionals and performers.
Due to popular demand and camper feedback, we are thrilled to announce that Bravo Academy will now extend to a full day camp. Advanced and additional performance opportunities will be available in addition to hands on theater tech experiences, exciting behind the scenes classes, and so much more.
All participants will take several fun and engaging classes including costume design, improvisation, voice, opera storytelling, movement, special effects/lighting design and SO MUCH MORE! Your time at Bravo Academy will conclude with a showcase and performance where you can show off all the skills you learned during your time with us. Have a blast making new friends in a fun, fascinating environment this summer with Pittsburgh Opera in Bravo Academy!
Week 1: Monday, July 7, 2025 – Friday, July 11, 2025
Week 2: Monday, July 14, 2025 – Friday, July 18, 2025
REGISTRATION FOR 2025 IS NOW OPEN!
For more information contact Rebekah Diaz via email or by phone at 412-281-0912 x256.
This program is supported, in part, by the Greater Pittsburgh Arts Council through its Allegheny Arts Revival Grant.
This project is supported in part by the National Endowment for the Arts.