Closing the Gap
At Carnegie Mellon, Sweta double majored in decision sciences and international relations. While decision sciences, which falls under the umbrella of behavioral science, is now a mainstream major at universities, it was a fairly new discipline back in the early 2000s.
“No one discipline alone can explain human behavior,” she says. “Behavioral science brings together all these fields to understand the mismatch between how humans perceive the world and risk. It’s the study of perception versus reality and how to close that gap between what people are scared of or what they are not, based on the data and statistics of real risk.”
“Whether we trust who is communicating the risk to us is one of the biggest predictors of what humans will prescribe or not prescribe to risk.”
She credits Baruch Fischhoff , the Howard Heinz University Professor for Politics and Strategy in the College of Engineering’s Department of Engineering and Public Policy and at CMU’s Institute for Politics and Strategy, for guiding her to her current path.
“He’s a pioneer in the field and took the time to cultivate young people,” she says. “I was lucky to be one of them. It shows what professors at CMU can do for students to guide their career trajectory. It resulted in me pursuing this field and becoming a behavioral scientist.”
Fischhoff valued Sweta’s love of the field as much as she appreciated his guidance.
"Sweta is just the kind of student we hoped would find us when (former CMU Associate Professor) Jenn Lerner and I created the decision science major, someone who is eager for the challenge of integrating diverse disciplinary perspectives, and then applying them to tackle complex world problems,” Fischhoff says. “We might have provided the education, but it is Sweta who provided the passion and energy. We can all be proud of her accomplishments to date and to come."
Sweta went on to earn her Ph.D. in risk management at King’s College London and complete her postdoctoral work at the University of Oxford. Prior to her current roles, she worked in academia and for a think tank.