The Perfect Pace
Meela received her bachelor’s degrees in 2013 and went on to earn dual master’s degrees in professional writing and investigative journalism in 2015. From there, she took a full-time job in desktop publishing.
“I thought that it was everything I wanted to do,” she says. “But I found myself missing and longing for the faster-pace work environment that I got so used to at Carnegie Mellon. I was in publishing for less than a year before it became immediately apparent to me that I wanted to get into the startup space.”
Meela left her job at the publishing company to join Noom, an early-stage health tech startup. The company downsized less than two years later, making her the only marketing team member.
“It was a throw-you-to-the-wolves situation,” she says. “That was a crazy experience — being at such a fast-paced startup and being given so much responsibility right off the bat.”
Meela was well-prepared for the demands of the job thanks to her involvement with extracurriculars at CMU. She’d been a Greek life officer, orientation counselor, student body vice president and publisher at The Tartan.
“Immersing myself in those extracurriculars and those commitments was the most rewarding experience,” Meela says. “They taught me the most and prepared me for the real world equally as much as the coursework did. It was incredibly impactful for me.”
Meela helped Noom build its brand from the ground up, and then moved on to do the same at other early-stage startups, including Aaptiv, Jumprope, Seated and EasyKnock.
Looking back, she realizes now why the publishing industry wasn’t a good fit.
“It was just a slower pace and a space where your value to a company was measured in the time that you had been there rather than the output of your work,” Meela says. “As Carnegie Mellon students, we'd been taught to be efficient and output oriented. That became so ingrained in me that the idea of my value or contributions being measured in any way that wasn't my work output didn't jive with me.”