Upward and Onward
Throughout Janet’s military career that spanned 25 years, women increasingly joined the Navy’s ranks. Only two other women were in her first squadron, but it grew to about 10 women before she left in 1988. She met even more later.
In 1993, Janet received a call that the first two aircraft carriers were going to sea with women, and the air wing commander wanted her to join his staff. Janet became the first female officer to report to a carrier air group.
“I never went in thinking they were going to give me a hard time because I was a woman,” Janet says. “I went in thinking I’m going to go in and kick butt, so that they couldn’t say, ‘Oh, you’re just here because you’re a woman.’”
For six months leading up to the launch, she led plans to accommodate women in the berths. It was a difficult challenge.
“I had detractors, but I also had champions,” Janet says. “Occasionally someone didn’t want me there because I was female. I had instructors and other people with whom I flew who insisted I get what I wanted because I deserved it.”
Once the carrier was at sea, Janet lived her dream to the fullest.
“Being on the air wing staff, I flew with all of the squadrons: the F-14, EA-6B, S-3 and E-2,” Janet says. “If you’ve seen ‘Top Gun,’ I’m Goose. I was either in the right seat or back seat doing the communications and the navigation, basically like a co-pilot.”
During her military career, Janet rose to the rank of commander and served as an executive officer.
After retiring from active duty in 2006, she taught a variety of aviation-related subjects in the College of Aviation at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University in Daytona Beach, Florida, until retiring for good, or at least for now, in 2021.
“It has been a real honor to help break through some of the glass in the ceiling, as well as help teach and mentor not only future naval officers but also women in all aspects of aviation,” Janet says.
“Women still make up a very small portion of the aviation world, so to be seen as a role model was a responsibility I took very seriously. I’m happy to say I stay in touch with many of my former midshipmen and students, and the future is in very capable hands.”