As the first BME-specific professorship, the Dr. Hillard and Joan Lazarus Endowed Career Development Professorship will bolster the department by advancing one of BME's up-and-coming star faculty and their research and teaching initiatives. Career development professorships play the important role of recognizing and showing support for young faculty early in their careers, while also providing them with resources to create exceptional educational experiences.
"I continue to be extremely grateful to Carnegie Mellon University for the incredible education I received.,” Hillard says. “I was one of the first engineering students who wanted to pursue a career in medicine, and the university could not have done more to help me. Our gift to support the College of Engineering by creating the first biomedical engineering endowed professorship is another opportunity to secure the best and brightest people with that unique Carnegie Mellon ability to overcome challenges, to further advance the development of better diagnostics and treatments and ultimately stamp out disease.”
"The department of biomedical engineering is incredibly grateful to Hillard and Joan Lazarus,” says Keith Cook, biomedical engineering department head and professor. “Dr. Lazarus has long been a friend and supporter of our department, and we are thrilled to have the first BME-specific professorship in their name. This gift will help our brightest young faculty members and their students have an even greater impact on biomedical engineering.”
Hillard is a longstanding CMU alumnus, volunteer and donor who serves on the College of Engineering’s Dean’s Advocacy Council as well as the Libraries’ Dean’s Advocacy Council. At the 2011 CMU Alumni Awards, he received the Alumni Distinguished Achievement Award. Joan Lazarus is an artist who graduated from the University of Cincinnati. In 2002, they also established the Dr. Hillard and Joan Lazarus Scholarship Fund, which has supported the education of eight students at Carnegie Mellon.