In the fall, the American Historical Association (AHA) honored both Trotter and Jackie with separate awards. Trotter received the John Lewis Award for History and Social Justice . While Jackie , who is currently pursuing her Ph.D. in the Department of History at Yale University, received the AHA’S Raymond J. Cunningham Prize . The prize is awarded to the best article published in a journal written by an undergraduate student. Her project, “ The Chinese Labor Experiment: Contract Workers in the Northeastern United States ,” is derived from her senior honors thesis. At Yale, Jackie is expanding on her work from her undergraduate career at CMU. She is studying history with an interest in Asian American immigration and race in the early 20th century.
The senior honors thesis program gives seniors in Dietrich College the opportunity to work on independent research and creative projects under the guidance of a faculty member. When it came time for Jackie to select a faculty advisor for her thesis, Trotter was an easy pick.
“Going forward when I wanted to write a senior thesis, there wasn’t anyone in the department yet who specifically worked on my area of Asian American history,” Jackie says. “I knew professor Trotter writes a lot about labor history, so if I was trying to research Chinese immigration through the lens of labor I might get something really productive out of working with him.”
In October 2023, Jackie returned to Pittsburgh to give a presentation at the Heinz History Center. Her presentation took place the same weekend as the Urban History Association conference, coordinated by Trotter. During her trip, Jackie presented on Pittsburgh’s Chinatown and connected with Carl Kubler , a global historian of modern China and peoples of Chinese descent at CMU.
“I'm really excited about professor Kubler's research and the classes he's teaching, as well as the expanded Asian American studies course offerings at CMU. I hope students take advantage of these opportunities to learn about diverse Asian American experiences and stories, think critically about dominant narratives and develop a fuller understanding of the present,” Jackie says.