“I was trying to empower consumers to get the best half shell experience,” Julie says. “Whether or not they were going out to an oyster bar, I wanted them to know what questions to ask, know when they were getting a good deal, know how to identify specific species so they were not getting a bait and switch, and be able to buy their oysters and shuck them at home, because that is the most economic approach.”
The blog led to a new opportunity for Julie in the sustainable seafood industry. She was offered a full-time job as the marketing director for Australis Aquaculture, a company that produces and sells ocean-farmed barramundi fish.
“I naively thought, ‘How big of a difference can there be between oysters and fish?’ But it's actually very stark,” she says. “The seafood industry opened my eyes to the entire supply chain and how different components worked. It is incredibly fascinating and a very exciting sector to be in.”
Julie stayed with the company for eight years. During that time, she kept up with her oyster work, including writing, traveling and teaching masterclasses about oyster appreciation to consumers and restaurant staff.
In 2023, she co-founded Oyster Master Guild , a network of oyster service professionals who are committed to raising the standards of oyster service and appreciation worldwide through education, training and community. The company is currently developing its first professional certification program for oyster sommeliers — a term Julie created to describe her own role in the oyster industry.
“An oyster sommelier is someone who fully understands the production cycle and the life cycle of an oyster, how that translates into the taste and flavor experience and how to open and present the oyster properly so that consumers are getting what they're really paying for,” she says. “It’s about helping consumers understand all of the work and energy that goes into producing this amazing, incredible live shellfish.”
As for the work and energy it takes to be an entrepreneur? Julie doesn’t mind, because her heart is in it.
“I still think about the motto ‘my heart is in the work’ and that taught me to always do what I love,” Julie says. “It has to be a marriage between what you're good at and what you are passionate about. It’s what guides me.”