A first edition copy of Isaac Newton's Principia Mathematica (1687) in the Posner Memorial Collection.
The Posner Curator for Special Collections Fund
The commitment will devote $2 million to creating a Posner Curator for Special Collections Fund, which will support Lemley’s oversight of the collection’s care, display and expansion.
“Special Collections has a reputation for being a bit mysterious. What this gift allows the Libraries to do is to not only grow the collection, but make it radically inclusive and visible in new and engaging ways,” said Lemley. “It’s really the start of a new era, one that will be defined by openness, student experience, and public programming. I couldn’t be more excited. And I am deeply grateful to the Posner family and Foundation for their exceptionally generous support.”
The fund will enable Lemley to make new and world-class acquisitions and support Special Collections programs, such as visiting fellowships, named lectures and micro research grants for students and visiting scholars. It will support major exhibitions, such as Shakespeare’s First Folio , Architecture Archives , and Violins of Hope , which are three prior exhibitions mounted in the Posner Center. The fund will also further evolve the Posner Curatorial Internship , a program offering graduate students experience in cultural heritage institutions, including libraries, archives and museums. Under Lemley, interns have the opportunity to serve as a partner in the curatorial work done by Special Collections, coming away with tangible skills and a practiced ability to engage with a variety of cultural heritage work.
“We are thrilled to support the Libraries’ mission to give these collections new and enduring life throughout communities and generations,” Molloy said. “By making these incredible resources more accessible to students, researchers, and the general public, Special Collections can help shape future discoveries that leave their mark on our world.”
This commitment is the Posner family’s latest contribution to Carnegie Mellon’s groundbreaking Make Possible campaign. CMU’s generous community of over 71,000 donors has given more than $2.4 billion to date to support critical strategic priorities, including capital projects, fellowships and scholarships across the institution’s seven colleges and schools, and endowment support that fuels the work and impact of its exceptional students, faculty and staff.