"I used to think that Steve Jobs and those types of people would just walk into a room and a design automatically happened, like they had a magic wand," Ian says. "But when you learn the design process, it's never like that. It's mostly iteration. You're going to fail a ton, but that's good because you learn the wrong way to go and you pivot. I think once you have that mentality, you can do anything."
A year later and back in Los Angeles, Ian was nurturing House of Orange with the design skills he honed at CMU and his business hit the international stage. Indiana Pacers point guard Tyrese Haliburton wore a House of Orange sweatshirt during a press conference for the Pacers playoff series against the New York Knicks and photos of it went viral. The black "Don't Choke" hoodie featured a picture of Pacers legend Reggie Miller making a choking gesture at filmmaker Spike Lee, a courtside fixture at New York Knicks games.
Ian says it would have been easy to try to replicate this moment and create more viral pieces of clothing. But he looked to one of his inspirations, Virgil Abloh, the creator of Off-White and artistic director for Louis Vuitton's menswear collection, and decided to build a lasting fashion brand. He knew he had to stay true to his creative decision-making and not chase trends. The only item available with the Don't Choke design is still the hoodie, which is sold out.
"I'm definitely excited this all happened with the hoodie, but it doesn't change how I've designed," Ian says. "I designed from my opinion, and people like it or they don't. I think that's the purest way to design anything because it's from a place seated in yourself."
Ian's fashion brand focuses on streetwear, and he gravitated toward this style because of his love for basketball — and his family.
"Basketball and streetwear fashion are connected, and that's always been a part of me," he says. "I also have older brothers and my mom was very fashionable, so I saw how they dressed and it had a big impact on me. I've always been into clothing."
For Ian, though, House of Orange goes beyond fashion. It's a full-service creative and marketing agency where he can explore and integrate what he's learned about design into any product. He plans to continue to build the brand even as he moves to New York City to take a design position with JPMorganChase.
Ian has released several collections through House of Orange, including this year’s Back Out West line. It's inspired by Ian's return to L.A. from Pittsburgh and the experience of being back home. But he says he hopes to one day create a collection that incorporates elements of Pittsburgh.
"I never really wore beanies and gloves back in L.A., but that's a staple for me now," he says. "I'll wear a pea coat or a nice jacket, which wasn't part of my wardrobe until I went to Pittsburgh. So that's gonna happen for sure down the line."