A goat and a student gave Russell Walker an idea to help the Carnegie Mellon University community feel less stressed around finals by focusing more on hooves than homework through petting zoos.
In 2016, Walker, now an emeritus professor of mathematical sciences who earned his master’s degree and Ph.D. in mathematics at CMU, saw a student holding a goat at a petting zoo.
“This is as happy as you see students,” says Russell. “Everybody enjoys this.”
“I could hear them say, ‘I can only do this for another hour, then I have to go back to work,’” Russell recalls.
That moment stuck with Russell. The student, Be Deluty, graduated in 2018 with majors in biological sciences and chemistry and is now a veterinarian in Colorado.
“Those petting zoos were some of my only connections to animals through undergrad on the way to vet school,” Be says. “I remember that little goat fell asleep on me, and it was wonderful.”
Russell has made sure that Carnegie Mellon students now and in the future can experience that same joy by endowing a fund to the Activities Board, the student-run campus events/programming branch of Student Government that provides programs for fellow students. The fund will allow the Activities Board to hold at least one petting zoo annually.
“The whole purpose is to give students a break,” Russell says. “It’s great to see people so delighted.”
The first event funded by the endowment took place April 18 and featured calves, puppies, lambs, an alpaca and other animals.
Devika Supriya Mohan, a sophomore and events lead for the Activities Board’s Events Committee, helped organize the event. She said more than 600 people attended.
“The response was very positive,” Devika says. “Many students told us it was their favorite event of the year. Some even said it was exactly what they needed to push through the end of the semester. It was amazing to hear how much of an impact a few hours with friendly animals could make.”
Vice President for Student Affairs Gina Casalegno attended as well. She says the experience was positive for the Carnegie Mellon community.
“I was delighted to see so many community members bring Russ’s vision to life,” she says. “Campus was transformed with students abounding to take a pause, enjoy the sunshine and spend time with an animal.”
Jack Crone, coordinator for the Office of Student Involvement and Traditions, advises the Activities Board. He says endowments like Russell’s provide students with new experiences.
“When a gift like this provides students with an event or program that creates a new or out-of-the-ordinary experience, it helps our students recharge and refocus once they are settled back into the usual student routine,” Jack says.
The Activities Board is already planning for next year’s events. Devika says the funding makes a significant impact for the Activities Board and their fellow students.
“Thanks to the generous endowment from Professor Russell Walker, we now have more resources to continue hosting events like the petting zoo for years to come,” Devika says.