Evolving Dreams
As a child growing up in the Bronx in New York City, Aria wanted to be a singer. She joined a professional children’s choir at age 12, and by age 15, she had performed at Carnegie Hall and what is now known as David Geffen Hall.
Having accomplished that dream, she looked for something new that showcased her math talents.
At a college fair, she picked up a stack of applications and completed three of them including CMU as it topped the stack — unbothered by the fact she didn’t know where Pittsburgh was.
“CMU called me on the phone,” she says. “A student called and asked if I had any questions, so that was why I ended up picking CMU. When I was a student there, I volunteered to be the student calling because that meant so much to me.”
A teaching assistant in her first-year physics class convinced Aria to switch her major to physics. When she decided not to go home in the months before her sophomore year, she knocked on the doors of professors seeking a summer job.
Professor of Physics Jeffrey B. Peterson told her to come back on June 1 and get started. Working in his lab opened doors for Aria.
She learned useful skills for her future endeavors like soldering, mastering an oscilloscope, making circuit board layouts, welding and the workings of a machine shop. Her main project was working on a microwave correlator for the AMEBA telescope.
During her senior year, she spent two weeks in Antarctica, working on the VIPER telescope at the South Pole , an opportunity made possible by an undergraduate research grant Peterson secured.
Also in the Peterson lab, she met fellow Tartan Mike Vincent, who had graduated from Mellon College of Science in 1999 and went on to work at Fermilab. He encouraged her to apply there, too.
“Working in the Peterson lab was one of the best experiences,” Aria says. “It gave me work experience, so when I was interviewing at Fermilab I could say, ‘Yes, I can solder stuff. Yes, I know how to use an oscilloscope.’ It also allows you to meet people from other classes.”