Carnegie Mellon University’s Tepper School of Business has partnered with Golub Capital to establish the Golub Capital Board Fellows Program. This partnership will provide support and resources to MBA students getting hands-on experience in nonprofit board governance while contributing to the advancement of local nonprofit partners.
The Golub Capital Board Fellows Program is designed to enhance the educational experience of Tepper School master’s students by combining academic coursework with real-world board service. Students will serve as ex-officio board members for nonprofits, completing strategic projects that leverage their skills and advance the missions of their partner organizations.
"Establishing the Golub Capital Board Fellows program marks a significant milestone for the Tepper School by enriching our educational offerings and strengthening our connections with our community,” says Isabelle Bajeux-Besnainou , dean and Richard P. Simmons Professor of Finance at the Tepper School. “We are proud to support our students as they develop into thoughtful leaders who can positively impact society."
The program aligns with the Tepper School’s commitment to experiential learning and community engagement, bridging the gap between academia and real-world governance. It enriches the school's curriculum and strengthens connections with the nonprofit sector.
The program will be run through the Accelerate Leadership Center at the Tepper School, which offers leadership training to students through coaching, immersive workshops and customized programs. Students develop the skills to be confident and inclusive leaders by focusing on emotional intelligence, cultural humility and constructive dialogue, enabling them to lead effectively in diverse, competitive environments.
“We are grateful to receive this gift which will add an experiential outlet for skill development that will be impactful as we grow the next generation’s executive leaders,” says Rebecca Joyce Lamperski, executive director of the Accelerate Leadership Center.
Golub Capital, a market-leading direct lender and credit asset manager, has a history of supporting social impact initiatives. This grant to the Tepper School of Business reflects their ongoing commitment to fostering leadership and innovation in the nonprofit sector.