CMU junior Andy Jiang's research project is an extension of field work his architecture professor, Tommy Yang, performed as a student himself, which involved the mapping and drawing of cosmopolitan villages in Chiang Mai with other students under the guidance of Professor of Architecture and Urban Design Brian McGrath from Parsons the New School. (Tommy Yang, January 2020)
The project is an extension of field work Yang performed as a student himself that involved mapping and drawing the cosmopolitan villages in Chiang Mai with other students under the guidance of Professor of Architecture and Urban Design Brian McGrath from Parsons School of Design.
How Andy is stitching the individual stories together in the archive to tell the larger narrative requires a lot of thought and hard work, Yang says, and “is an act of service and caregiving to those we have interviewed.”
The project is a good match for Andy, who has a passion for creating interactive experiences. Andy is vice president of the Game Creation Society (GCS) , a student-run organization at CMU that provides an environment for people of various disciplines to work together on projects as they would in a real development environment.
In July, he participated in the Gamemakers Toolkit Game Jam, an annual game-making marathon where individuals and teams have 48 hours to create a game that fits that year’s theme. Andy’s team won 11th place among the 7,000 games submitted.
Since June 2023, the archive project has expanded from four to 12 villages. When the website goes live in May, viewers will be able to immerse themselves in the villagers’ stories and learn about the matrilocal networks still present in their family compounds through pages that contain 3D models of the structures and layers of information that display historical and present-day data.
“Tommy is a great instructor. All the projects he leads are very innovative,” Andy says. “I enjoy making interactive experiences and hope to make an impact on the world through them, whether it’s a form of activism through projects like this one or by bringing joy and connection to people’s lives through the games I create.”