Heinz Sight is 20/20
Ngani remembers her initial interest in Heinz College’s programs.
“For a string of years in my twenties, I consistently lived with ‘Heinzer’ roommates and colleagues,” Ngani says. “I took note of their ability to look at things with their data-centric approach, plus I saw the technical analysis offered in their coursework.”
Once at CMU, she learned those valuable, career-impacting lessons, too.
“My Methods of Policy Analysis course with (Adjunct Professor of Public Policy and Management) Harold Miller was perfect for me,” Ngani says. “Essentially, he taught a boot camp on what my next job would be.”
Her Organizational Design and Implementation course surprised her with the valuable skills she says she now uses often.
“It covered the basics of succeeding in the workplace as both manager and employee, while emphasizing the need to understand the dynamics of a particular workplace,” Ngani says. “It’s become vital in my career, and I’m certainly very happy to have proven wrong about it.”
Perhaps most vital to her road ahead, she was a Women of Transportation fellow in CMU’s Traffic21 transportation research institute , a learning lab for problem solvers and thought leaders led by Executive Director Stan Caldwell.
"Ngani's experience is an ideal example of our vision for that fellowship, which is supported by the Hillman Foundation and the U.S. Department of Transportation's University Transportation Centers program,” Stan says.
“The fellowship immersed Ngani into the world of transportation where she then pursued a career applying her policy education and passion for public service, bringing a much-needed diverse perspective to the transportation industry."
She says the multidisciplinary approach utilized at Traffic21 was ahead of the transportation industry.
“Everyone there understood that problems require multiple perspectives and expertise,” Ngani says.
You need to have people who understand policy, people who understand human behavior and people who recognize the increasing need for computer science, robotics and Intelligent Transportation Systems.”
“Great offerings like this at CMU helped set me up for success now and in the future.”