Path to Public Service
Douglas grew up in Washington, D.C., and Rochester, New York, where careers in public service were highly regarded.
“I came from a family and a community where that was very strongly encouraged,” he says. “Public service, at least where I grew up, was considered the noblest calling that you could have.”
He served in the Army for three years before attending the State University of New York at Brockport, where he received a bachelor’s degree in criminal justice. He then took a job as a shift commander in a correctional facility. Douglas enjoyed the work, but wanted to pursue a different career path.
He took a break to do some traveling, and ended up teaching English at a maritime academy in Poland. While there, he met a CMU alumna who convinced him to apply to graduate school at CMU.
“Let's just say I was provisionally accepted,” says Douglas, who received a master’s degree in public management from Heinz College. “The dean was most impressed with my background because I was a military veteran, I'd worked in law enforcement, I had done all these things, and so I had more real-world experience than the average student. He said, ‘We will conditionally accept you, but you have to take remedial math.’”
The math class was taught by Teaching Professor of Information and Decision Systems Janusz Szczypula , who was a teaching assistant at the time.
“He was great,” Douglas says. “He was the perfect TA. He said, ‘We're going to start from third grade math and work our way up to pre-calculus.’ And he did it.
“It was that intense, but it was absolutely necessary. By the time I graduated, you could give me any problem set, no matter what the topic was, and I could turn it into a mathematical equation. I might not be able to give you the answer, but I can sit there and say, this is how you solve this problem. That's what Carnegie Mellon teaches you.”
Douglas also had a head start on his career by the time he graduated.
He was selected for the Presidential Management Fellows Program , the federal government's premier leadership development program for advanced degree holders. The program matches outstanding graduate students with opportunities in the federal government. Douglas chose to work for the Department of Defense.
“I selected DOD because I wanted to travel,” Douglas says. “It seemed like the work they were doing was very interesting because at that time, supply chain management was not very well-known outside of industry. It intrigued me because I was doing a lot of operational science-type stuff when I was in grad school and was able to apply what I learned to that specific job.”