Starring as young Lady Agatha Danbury as part of Netflix’s “Bridgerton” franchise, Carnegie Mellon University alum Arsema Thomas is — finally — living their dream.
A dream that they say felt impossibly out of reach during their time as a Mellon College of Science student pursuing their bachelor’s degree in biological sciences with the goal of a future in medicine.
“I tried to take an acting for non-majors class,” says Arsema, who graduated from CMU in 2016 and also holds a master’s degree in public health from Yale University.
“But there was just something about being so close to something you love and want but not having it. It was actually so much more painful, so I just shut it out.”
Even with friends enrolled in various College of Fine Arts programs, they never attended a play, musical or any theater production during their time on campus.
So, dearest readers, how did Arsema end up with their breakout role on “Queen Charlotte: A Bridgerton Story,” which held a spot on the streaming service’s Top 10 Most-Watched Shows ranking with upward of 80.3 million views when it debuted in 2023?
They followed their heart — into acting and living their values of equity and anti-racism in all that they do.
VIDEO
“A Very Big Crash Course on Life”
Arsema grew up “everywhere.”
Their dad is Nigerian, and their mom is Ethiopian. Both are diplomats, leading to the bulk of Arsema’s formative years being spent in Uganda, Kenya, Benin, and Togo. They instilled in them an interest in global and African affairs and a drive to positively impact the continent.
As a teenager, they were attending a boarding school in Lancaster, Pennsylvania, when their father brought up Carnegie Mellon.
“My dad would tell me, ‘The top 25 schools in the world, those are the only places you can go,’” they say. “I remember CMU being on that list.”
That global notoriety coupled with an article about Conflict Kitchen, a now-shuttered School of Art project that featured rotating menus from cultures less heard and less known in the U.S., set them on a Tartan path.
“CMU just felt like the place I needed to be,” Arsema says. “It was a place that was having those transparent discussions. It had the type of revolutionary, passionate energy that I have, and I wanted to be in a space that had that as well.”
When they arrived at CMU, they planned to use their studies to improve health care across African nations and advise Western countries on how to effectively assist residents.
“When I think about what I actually went to school for, what's on my degree and the education that I came out of it with, I honestly feel I got a very big crash course on life,” Arsema says.