The Performing Artist
Beth teaches sixth-grade science at Dorseyville Middle School in the Fox Chapel Area School District, outside of Pittsburgh.
A versatile educator for more than 20 years, she has also taught fourth and fifth grades, literacy, reading support and gifted programs.
“Each teaching position is accompanied by new challenges that have provided me with opportunities to learn and grow as an educator,” Beth says. “CMU helped me learn to fear no challenge. I had to walk out on stage and perform by myself so many times. When you didn’t have confidence, you learned how to be confident. Instilling confidence in my students is a fundamental building block of our learning environment.”
She always wanted to be a teacher, but her musical talent drew her to CMU.
At the College of Fine Arts School of Music , Beth played the double bass, earning her bachelor’s and master’s degrees in musical performance for the instrument in 1990 and 1992. The late Anthony Bianco, a CMU professor and Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra bassist, taught her to have perseverance that she impresses upon her students.
“Mr. Bianco truly taught the value of getting the grade that you earned,” Beth says. “He would say, ‘I wouldn’t give anyone an A unless you were ready for the New York Philharmonic.’ When you earned the A, you knew that you were ready.”
By graduation, she had earned the A. After CMU, the western Pennsylvania native performed widely as a freelance musician, from the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts to Carnegie Hall.
Coincidentally, a concertmaster of the New York Philharmonic and former CMU faculty member, the late Sidney Harth, asked her to join the KwaZulu-Natal Symphony Orchestra in South Africa in the 1990s. Beth declined.
“I wanted to stay and teach. Teaching is a performance art. The classroom is now my stage, and my students’ successes are my masterpieces,” she says.
A corner of her science classroom is filled with letters of appreciation, thank you cards and printed emails from past students, all in picture frames.
“This is my paycheck,” Beth says. “All of those messages are incredible stories. The music world was rewarding, but teaching is what I was called to do. There are no words to describe the impact every one of my students has contributed to my development as a teacher.”