The Perfect Partners
Evan knew that in order for his organization to grow and succeed, local companies had to be invested in TALI’s mission and work.
Strong corporate involvement and a quality educational partner also would be necessary for success.
He couldn’t imagine a better partner than his own alma mater — and its business school.
“A business school can be used as a model for true community impact,” Evan says. “CMU has a deep history of serving the community and is synonymous with a quality education, and we knew the Tepper School would be an excellent partner. It’s an institution with a world-class reputation that would propel us forward and allow us to expand.”
In early 2017, he shared the TALI concept with CMU’s Richard C. Green Professor of Financial Economics Robert M. Dammon, who was Tepper School’s dean at the time.
Dammon introduced Evan to CMU’s executive education team. Together, Evan and the team developed the Executive Leadership Academy (ELA), the flagship program between CMU and TALI that launched in January 2019. The ELA programs focus on topics of executive education that are customized to address the unique challenges of Black professionals; any qualified individual is eligible to participate in the program, regardless of race.
“I was excited when Evan came to see me about the idea of developing a partnership to help educate and prepare Black professionals for leadership success,” Dammon says. “Evan has delivered on his vision and promise. TALI has brought together leading Pittsburgh corporations and organizations with world-class faculty at the Tepper School to educate and prepare the next generation of leaders for Pittsburgh and western Pennsylvania.”
TALI and CMU also partnered in 2021 on the Emerging Leaders Program, which is geared towards leaders earlier in their career trajectory. The curriculum focuses on executive education, mentorship and supportive peer networks.
“Mentorship in the program is a critical factor to its success,” Evan says. “But perhaps even more important in terms of long-lasting effects, is when those same mentors turn into sponsors. Sponsorship must be earned and can’t just be assigned. People using their social capital on behalf of someone else will help others advance.”
Evan also met his goals of expanding TALI from an initiative into an institute through strong corporate backing and seven-figure grants from the Richard King Mellon Foundation, Highmark Foundation, and BNY Mellon Foundation of Southwestern Pennsylvania.
“After the national awakening following George Floyd’s death, we had a rich conversation with the head of the Richard K. Mellon Foundation, who asked about our expansion plans,” Evan says. “Through those conversations, we got the funding we needed to grow.”