Linda Addison has had two careers — software engineer and horror writer — and they’re more similar than you might think.
“Both require discipline,” Linda says. “You need to possess the ability to see an arc. With software programming, you start with a general task and then need to drill down, then debug before achieving results — and the same can be applied to writing a story. The debugging is the rewriting.”
Now retired from the software industry and living in Tucson, Arizona, it’s clear that Linda is good at writing both code and poetry. She is a five-time winner of the Horror Writers Association’s (HWA) Bram Stoker Award for her poetry collections, and she received a lifetime achievement award from the HWA in 2018. In 2020, the Science Fiction Poetry Association honored her with a Grand Master of Fantastic Poetry Award, making Linda the first Black recipient of the award.
The combination of the two professions may seem unusual, but it was clear to Linda early on that a stable job in the tech world would give her the space for her creative writing endeavors, and she credits her CMU education for providing that chance.
“CMU was the gate to a better life,” she says.
While Linda spent her entire career in tech, she also consistently authored horror poems and stories since graduating from Carnegie Mellon with a bachelor’s degree in mathematics in 1974. The programming job was a passion that paid the bills, but her love of storytelling — especially the spooky tales — stems from her childhood.
“My mother was an amazing fablemaker,” Linda says. “She naturally knew how to leave us kids in suspense, by ending an evening of storytelling with a cliffhanger. She had a beautiful, wonderful, natural rhythm of telling stories.”
Linda’s mother, Janet Webster, had a masterful touch with the stories she told, even weaving in Linda and her eight siblings as characters in the tales. That talent was passed to Linda, she says, who often turned to her own stories when she was asked to entertain her brothers and sisters in their Philadelphia-area home.