All the World’s a Stage
Maurice became an educator almost by happenstance. What began as a side job, teaching acting classes and summer theater programs, gradually developed into a skill set to make ends meet while building his acting career.
Unexpectedly, a substitute teaching job he took at a Boston public school turned into a full-time position. Maurice taught ages 3 to 15 at the public school for five years, all while working in the theater on nights and weekends.
“I realized teaching was a dual passion of mine. Children are just brilliant and, at times, hilarious,” Maurice says.
It helped pay the bills but also opened his eyes to serious issues in K-12 education. He experienced what it was like to stretch limited funding and resources and teach struggling youth who were coping with trauma.
Teaching became fuel for his creative fire.
“Eventually, I left the school to focus more on theater-making,” Maurice says. “But I’d find myself in the theater telling my colleagues all of these stories about my time at the school. I had them laughing and crying.”
His colleagues were convinced Maurice had enough material to write a play. He collaborated with director and author Megan Sandberg-Zakian and playwright Melinda Lopez to create a one-man show.
Lyric Stage Company of Boston premiered “Mr. Parent” in 2022 starring Maurice, as himself, as he encounters real-life adventures teaching in a public school district. A second production in Boston in 2023 traveled to Rochester, New York, where it was adapted to cover issues in that state’s school system.
“One of my favorite things about acting is connecting to my scene partners on-stage, so doing a one-man show was challenging because it was just me up there. Plus, it was about my life,” Maurice says. “I mean, I have been naked on stage in previous shows, but I never felt more exposed than I am in ‘Mr. Parent.’”
Maurice’s ultimate decision to resign carried through in the play and resonated with teachers in the audience who talked to him after the show.
“It’s particularly hard for teachers right now. One woman told me I inspired her to keep striving,” he says.
In April, Maurice will direct “ A Strange Loop ” at Boston’s Wimberly Theater, a co-production with SpeakEasy Stage and The Porch.
“The twists and turns my life has taken!” he says. “If you had told me when I graduated from CMU that I would now be a full-time theater professor who is regularly acting and running my own theater company, I would have thought you were crazy. You just never know! You don’t always have to have it all figured out when you graduate. Just enjoy the ride!”