Over the next year, they also will complete an action project for their local communities, too.
For her application based around the year’s theme, “The Unity of the Realm and Human Rights,” Mahima pitched an action project in partnership with her concurrent role as a computer science fellow at the Surveillance Technology Oversight Project (STOP), a New York-based nonprofit that fights the mass surveillance of disadvantaged groups.
At STOP, Mahima advocates for privacy and warns against discriminatory surveillance technology. It made sense to focus her Humanity in Action efforts in that direction with a research report.
“These technologies are inherently biased, so our marginalized communities are disproportionately impacted,” she says of surveillance technologies like facial recognition. “For example, they adopt the gender binary, completely invalidating the existence of gender-expansive people. At STOP, we are organizing at the state and local levels to abolish these systems of surveillance.”
After Copenhagen, where Mahima and two other fellows created a podcast episode focusing on preserving indigenous culture through sports, she returned to New York City. During the day, she works in software engineering, but after hours and on weekends, she focuses on moving her action project forward.
“I hope it’s an eye-opening report that brings to light some of the injustices LGBTQ+ people face,” Mahima says. “We plan to incorporate a section with tips on how to combat certain surveillance techniques, so I hope we can provide genuinely useful advice to queer people. I also hope that the policy recommendations we make will have a broader legislative impact. Ultimately, I would like to see proactive policies implemented to preserve the right to privacy.”
Mahima’s support for disadvantaged communities ties in with her advocacy as a CMU student.
“My LGBTQ+ advocacy started when I was the president of the South Asian Student Association,” she says. “We held educational events about injustices faced by LGBTQ+ people in South Asian countries and fundraised for charities that worked on HIV and AIDS research, mental health resources and legal rights counseling for queer individuals.”