By Morgan Kistler
Carnegie Mellon University alumna Julia Royall’s varied interests, background and connections have taken her to careers and continents far beyond her initial pursuits in the world of theater.
Her path from theater to global health has a clear common thread — her passion for bringing together everything necessary to tell a compelling story.
She truly is a producer at heart.
During her time on campus, Julia earned a master’s degree in English literature from Dietrich College of Humanities and Social Sciences in 1973 and pursued doctoral coursework in theater aesthetics/dramatic literature from the College of Fine Arts. In 1976, she took a step back from the doctoral program to cofound The Iron Clad Agreement, an experimental theater company of actors, playwrights, directors, and songwriters who brought stories from the Gilded Age to the people of Pittsburgh.
As producer for the group, Julia pulled together the ideas, people and funds needed to bring these shows to life. For many of these components, she leaned on the expertise of her alma mater. She looked to the School of Drama for playwrights and directors; to the College of Engineering for an understanding of how inventions of the Gilded Age worked; and to Department of English for novels to adapt for the stage.
Through these interdisciplinary collaborations, Julia created productions with unique style.
Using factory loading docks, river barges, boardrooms and classrooms as performance spaces, the company built a minimalist theater without the benefit of sets, props or costumes. Instead of expecting people to go to a traditional theater to experience stories, The Iron Clad Agreement brought stories directly to audiences in familiar spaces.
These sites could tell the stories of Pittsburgh better than any stage ever could — and people loved it.
Recalling the group’s stage adaption of the novel, “Out of This Furnace,” Julia recounts how the sidewalk outside the union hall in Braddock — the Pittsburgh mill town where the story is set — was lined with people eagerly waiting to see the show.
“It was incredible,” she says. “It wasn’t to see us. It was to see their story.”