Educating on finance in climate change
In 2018, a chance encounter led Cynthia to move back to the U.S. to lead Chinese client relations for U.S.-based asset management firm Bridgewater Associates as head of China institutional clients.
Eventually, Cynthia was also tapped to join the board of GCCSI. She jumped at the chance to use her investment and human relations background for a think tank with a mission she supports, fighting climate change and supporting climate neutrality.
Cynthia had worked in investment banking with a variety of energy companies, and she also understood infrastructure. Her finance background gave her knowledge that many in the climate change sphere from scientific and technical backgrounds lack. In addition, her experience with Chinese government and markets was a major asset for an organization hoping to tackle long-term structural change on an international scale.
Cynthia is helping GCCSI be a resource to potential investors in alternative energies. She also helps the organization work with governments and social sector stakeholders. The role combines Cynthia’s communication and quantitative skills as she helps with messaging and measurable evaluations in a non-standardized industry.
Aside from the intellectual challenge, Cynthia’s decision to sign on with GCCSI also was motivated by her desire to use her skills to make a positive difference in the field of climate change.
“People in finance, we think we’re all encompassing, but at the end of the day, how much difference do we really make?” Cynthia asks. “So in a way, I do want to be able to explain to my kids what I do and make them proud of it.”
Cynthia is passionate about sustainability and after talking with Lester and Judith Lave Professor of Economics, Engineering and Public Policy Nicholas Z. Muller about the Tepper School Sustainability Initiative that he leads, she made a lead gift to establish and endow the Carnegie Mellon Sustainability Innovation Fund.
She hopes that other alumni will join her in supporting the school’s efforts in the impactful field. The fund will provide support to research, faculty and student activities; other sustainability related opportunities at the Tepper School of Business and collaborative campus projects in the sustainability area.
According to Cynthia, one of the challenges of sustainability initiatives has been the difficulty quantifying them. And if it’s difficult to measure the problem and potential solutions, it also will be difficult to hold investors, companies and governments accountable.
She says Carnegie Mellon is a good fit for quantifiable sustainability initiatives.
For example, she has been impressed with Muller’s work on the ESG Index, a multidisciplinary initiative to help asset managers make investment decisions and regulators form standardized disclosure requirements through quantifiable information.
“CMU is the pioneer in management science,” Cynthia notes. She hopes that the new fund will promote initiatives like the ESG Index because “we can see the outcome, and then we can direct capital toward those programs that give us the maximum outcome” to promote sustainability.
Reflecting on her career so far, Cynthia says she embraced a variety of opportunities that might not seem so straightforward but ultimately fit her strengths and interests as well as her overarching purpose.
“You can always learn more from people who are outside of your immediate neighborhood or communities, and that gives you perspective,” she says. “With more perspectives or some more understanding of the differences in people and culture, we do see more about the so-called ‘truth.’”
Cynthia says the chances she has taken, colleagues she’s met, and places she’s lived have given her not only professional satisfaction, but also personal fulfillment.
“Professionally, of course, that hopefully makes me a better adviser to my clients, and also a better listener to my friends and family,” she says.