Failing in Order to Succeed
The idea of “The Last of Us” was born at Carnegie Mellon University as part of a class from Associate Teaching Professor Ralph Vituccio. The class was assigned to pitch a game idea to “Night of the Living Dead” director George Romero, who selected the idea pitched by Neil’s classmate and College of Engineering and ETC alumnus Brad Stokan , now an art director at Pipeworks Studios.
“My idea had elements of Joel and Ellie in it, and it was shot down by George Romero. But I wasn’t upset,” Neil says.
ETC lessons gave him the humility needed to be a true team player. He spent that semester working as a VFX artist for his friend’s team and refining his collaboration skills.
“Had I gone in with the mentality that, ‘It always has to be my idea,’ I don't think I would have gotten to the same place at Naughty Dog where I could pitch what turned out to be ‘The Last of Us,’” Neil says. “That's something that stuck with me because even as the head of Naughty Dog, I'm part of a larger structure that is Sony, PlayStation and HBO. I don't get to make the calls on everything, and I can understand what my role is in these much larger structures.”
Collaboration has been key to the HBO series’ success. Neil is able to stay true to the tenor of the plot that made the game stand out while making room for the story to evolve as a scripted series — a prime example of which can be found in the series’ third episode.
Neil trusted writer, showrunner and co-creator Craig Mazin with reimagining the backstory for characters who are well-known to gamers.
The result was a stunningly beautiful episode. It immediately received award buzz preceded the announcement of “The Last of Us” renewal for a second season by just a few days.
“I used to think directing was having this picture in your head, and then you move people, pieces and assets around until it lines up with it,” Neil says.
“What I learned at CMU, and continued at Naughty Dog, is that it’s important to have a strong vision, but also find ways to allow other people to embrace that vision and make it their own. That’s how you get the best work and the best ideas.”
“When I work with collaborators like Craig, who’s an incredible writer, I'm going to give them room to stretch their wings and express themselves,” Neil says. “It gives them the space to create truly surprising art within the framework that we've established.”