Type Beauty semi-customizes makeup based on a user’s skin type and merges skin care and makeup in one product. The expanding, vegan makeup line includes concealers, foundations, primers, lip products, eyeshadows and tools with more products in the works.
"We conceptualize products for seven to eight months before they appear on shelves," Ananya says.
Before they reach stores, they are tested by dermatologists and consumers.
Products are named with the goal of giving users an extra boost of confidence. Lipsticks come in shades like Boardroom, Influencer and Rebel, and other products are based on sweet treats like coffee and chai.
"We wanted to relate things to natural, everyday things,” Ananya says. “We have foundation shades like Cookie and Frappé, it's all this really yummy, delicious stuff."
Type Beauty's team — about 30 people and growing — uses a scientific approach to create vegan and cruelty-free products.
Before opening her own product lab, Ananya made her first lipstick in The Design and Making of Skin and Hair Products course taught by CMU’s Associate Teaching Professor of Chemistry Gizelle Sherwood .
"I love being in the lab. It's so fun to see something that you start from scratch and materialize into an actual product,” Ananya says. “For me, that was a really big moment. It was all really cool to learn."
Sherwood recalled Ananya during the cosmetics and hair product course that is taken both chemistry and non-major students from across the CMU. In its current iteration, students learn about the chemical components in cosmetic products and the methods for preparing items such as shampoos, conditioners, lotions, soaps and creams. The course includes a hand-on laboratory experience. With regular guest lecturers from the School of Design, students also delve into marketing products.
"We knew Ananya's end goal was to open a business after graduation,” Sherwood says. “It's been phenomenal watching her success.”
With more product launches on the horizon, and a future AI tool in the works Ananya isn't slowing down anytime soon, but with her Carnegie Mellon education, she's ready for what is next.
Being able to combine scientific training with business courses at Carnegie Mellon has been invaluable to her.
"It's really important to have a strong technical base in anything and to know the basics," she says. "There's so much you can do with that knowledge in any kind of industry."
Carnegie Mellon is a family tradition, too. Her sister, Meha Kapur, is a junior in business administration at Tepper School of Business, and her father, Yadur Kapur, graduated from the Tepper School in 1993 and 1995 with bachelor's and master's degrees in business administration.
"I really wanted a small environment where I could do multiple things and not just stick to one major,” Ananya says. “I wanted to try different things, and I got to do that at Carnegie Mellon.”