Carbon Credit Challenges
Burning fossil fuels (think power plants, where we get our electricity) and deforestation are two of the main sources of carbon dioxide emissions responsible for climate change. The idea of carbon credits is that companies can offset the harm they cause through these emissions by doing positive things to remove carbon dioxide — like planting trees. But the system is far from perfect.
The credibility of carbon offset projects has drawn criticism. Some of the carbon industry’s registries allow developers to claim more climate-saving benefits than are merited, or it could be more blatant abuse. For example, a company might claim to be reforesting an area that they had razed expressly for the purpose of getting credit to replant. Pachama’s use of satellite imaging to evaluate an area’s past and present biomass (the trees and living organisms in a given area) prevents that kind of manipulation.
In addition to reliability issues, the process of verifying a baseline carbon situation is labor-intensive, outdated and expensive. Currently, scientists must travel to the project’s location and manually measure the biomass.
Pachama aims to solve those challenges, as well.
“The manual process doesn’t scale, and it’s one of the big bottlenecks,” Tomas says. “Coming from the tech world, I was thinking, ‘How can this be? It should be faster,’ and you need that attitude when you’re starting out, but there are also reasons why it’s this way. Measuring biomass is not an easy thing to do.”
The tech skills Tomas learned at Heinz College while pursuing master’s degrees in both information technology and also information systems management have enabled his leading-edge solutions to climate change challenges at Pachama.
“What we were learning in 2015 was so advanced for the time; it was at the cutting edge of what you could do with deep learning.”
“At the time, I probably took the curriculum for granted,” Tomas says.“In hindsight, what we were learning in 2015 was so advanced for the time; it was at the cutting edge of what you could do with deep learning.”
Tomas studied artificial intelligence, deep learning, cloud computing and an array of electives that satisfied his thirst for knowledge across different disciplines and areas of interest.
“Heinz really prepared me by exposing me to the newest and most innovative work in various fields,” Tomas says. “I was not yet thinking about Pachama, but tinkering with the idea of an aquaponics system. I took the social entrepreneurship class and covered many components that ended up being applied at Pachama.”
After working for a couple of years, Tomas had a moment of insight.
“I realized there was an incredible opportunity to leverage deep learning, remote sensing and finance to help out with the climate crisis,” Tomas says. “My first idea was agricultural insurance. After meeting my co-founder, Diego Saez Gil, I realized the world of carbon credits presented a unique way to realign ecology and economy.”
The duo shared a common vision of how technology could help humanity, and they got to work.
To address the challenge of reliability, Pachama created Dynamic Baselines , (now incorporated into their latest Project Evaluation Criteria 2.1 ), blending AI with a concept used in scientific experimentation and medicine: a control group.
Baselines are a measure of what would have happened to a project without the carbon credit incentive. The industry has a financial incentive to over-credit by creating worse-than-reality baseline scenarios. Even with honest intentions, individual consultants could have differing analyses of the baselines for the same area, depending on what data they consider. And each project is considered on a case-by-case basis.
Pachama’s project evaluation criteria creates an algorithmic baseline, uses satellite data to observe actual emissions and quantifies uncertainty into the equation. The company makes its methodology public and hopes it will become the industry standard.
“Transparency is desperately needed. The solutions we are providing have been well received by the market,” Tomas says.
The company is also employing technology to improve efficiency and scalability. They use satellite observations and digital measurement to augment the manual biomass measurements. They have automated credit calculations and use digital reporting and verification platforms to help modernize the processes. Rather than rewriting the playbook for carbon credits, Pachama is applying technology to improve upon existing methods.