Reimagining Imagination
After successfully running the academic gauntlet, Scott is going beyond passing fads to prove new ideas about potential. In his 2013 book, " Ungifted ," he drew from research in genetics, neuroscience, and many other fields of psychology to challenge what predicts adult success in children.
Inquiries into the creative mind produced more publications detailing what innovators do differently. The same ideas came into play in childhood education, with consideration of children who learn differently and develop exceptional talent while being labeled with “special needs.”
"We often have this false dichotomy: That there are the gifted kids and then there are the learning disabled kids over there, and never the twain should meet,” Scott says. “I’m trying to break down this harmful dichotomy and show that profound gifts can co-exist with profound challenges — in the same human! This opens up new ways of thinking about intelligence and potential that actually incorporate challenges and overcoming struggles as part of the potential of a human in their quest for creativity and purpose."
His more recent research can be described with buzzwords like “self-actualization.” Still, it offers a fresh take on psychology's seminal theories around human needs while providing evidence-based tools for individuals to apply to their individual journeys. This research fueled his creation of “self-actualization coaching,” where he uses the latest science of human potential to help all individuals recognize and reach their full potential.
His forthcoming book, " Rise Above ," explores the idea of a “victim mindset” contrasted with an “empowerment mindset,” incorporating his research as well as new lines of inquiry and ideas from his popular undergraduate class on "The Science of Living Well" at Columbia.
"Young people are desperate right now for meaning and sense of their belonging in this world, with so much that's unpredictable. The book values the extent to which your own psychology plays a role in your own well-being and self-actualization, " he says. "It's showing that we shouldn't be measuring everyone with the same measuring stick. That's why the work that I do is so relevant."