Now in his seventh year as executive director and with previous roles at The Youth Choral Theater of Chicago and Chicago Fringe Festival — as well as a fascination with choral music that began as a young child — Justin commits his professional and personal energies to bringing the gift and joy of choral music to as many audiences as he can.
The more than 250 singers who make up the GMCW take part in more than 125 outreach concerts and events each year, and the organization also boasts three vocal ensembles, a youth chorus and a dance ensemble. They have performed for two presidents — Barack Obama and Bill Clinton — and in venerable venues like the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts and Carnegie Hall.
At GMCW, performers can focus on bringing their best and fullest selves to the stage with the confidence that the organization they love is growing and thriving under Justin’s leadership.
“I break my role into four main pillars — finance, fundraising, operations and connections,” Justin says. “I connect with members of our surrounding communities, too. It’s important to make sure we are linked with other choruses, as well as with other LGBTQ+ organizations, both locally and nationally.”
Those efforts ensure that the GMCW is both affecting audiences in Washington, D.C., and part of a larger impact being made by arts organizations around the country.
Justin credits much of his confidence in promoting the organization’s mission to his days as a Tartan.
“The most significant thing that I can make a connection to is having learned how to energize large groups of people,” he says. “Participating in group projects and meeting so many new people in my classes gave me the skills to get people with differing perspectives and opinions on the same page. Now, I help our members, audiences and community of supporters understand that no matter what, our mission is always at the forefront.”
Justin credits a Heinz College presentation skills class with former teaching professor Pam Lewis with developing his poise around public speaking. Speaking to GMCW’s needs and goals in a professional but compelling way means getting the attention of the right people.
“I’ve learned how to guide an organization through where it is at present — learning everything you can about it and sharing what you’ve learned with people who can help push you forward — while looking toward and planning for the future.”