“All of a sudden, we took off,” Joe says. “We were going in so many directions with more musical variety shows, events, award shows and then, with ‘Friends,’ to sitcoms.”
Television hits like “Dharma & Greg,” “The Drew Carey Show,” “Two and a Half Men,” “The Big Bang Theory,” “Mike and Molly,” “Mom” and “The Connors” fill their resume alongside the American Music Awards, ESPY Awards, “Dick Clark’s New Year’s Rockin’ Eve” and “Conan.” Food Network cooking competitions like “Holiday Baking Championship,” 23 cycles of Miss Universe, and specials for Carol Burnett, Celine Dion and Michael Bublé  are just some of the hundreds of multi-camera shows designed by the duo.
In total, they’ve earned 43 Primetime and Daytime Emmy nominations and won six Emmys including a three-year run for Music Variety Design. They’ve designed more than 156 TV show pilots — 62 that went to series — for a total of more than 3,010 episodes.
Both thank CMU for all they’ve been able to accomplish — and they want to ensure others can achieve the same heights of success, too.
“Our time on campus really became the beginnings of something that I don't think either one of us ever imagined,” John says. “Carnegie Mellon is like Hogwarts that way. It is a place of magical thinking.”
“We had the greatest faculty that made us feel that anything was possible. Of course, we were critiqued. Of course, things didn't always work out right. But for whatever reason, at CMU, you always knew you’d pick yourself up and do it again. And that mindset has served us very well.”
John and Joe’s generosity helps to ensure students will benefit from the same lessons far into the future, says Robert Ramirez, head of CMU’s School of Drama.
“Thanks to their support, our young people will be equipped to create inspiring theater and performance works that share their diverse voices and engage the world in thought-provoking conversations.”
The couple also encourages fellow Tartans to not wait to give back.
“It’s never too soon,” Joe says. “When we supported the studio space, we spaced it out over an installment plan. It made us feel so good. We knew it was the right thing to do because without Carnegie Mellon, our career and our life together wouldn’t have happened.”