What is Forest Bathing?
Forest bathing promotes wellness through immersing oneself in the calming and restorative atmosphere of natural environments. The practice originated from the Japanese tradition of shinrin-yoku or "forest bathing,” which is backed by research to provide an array of physical and mental health benefits. This slow, mindful experience consists of a series of invitations (suggested activities) with time for sharing after each invitation. Sharing is also invitational, and participants are free to craft the experience to support their own needs.
Learn More From PGH City Paper
In preparation for the program, please note the following:
Distance/Terrain: The forest bathing portion of the program will take place on varying surfaces including sidewalks, grass, gravel, and dirt pathways on the Frick grounds. The total distance will be up to 1/2 mile. The grades will be flat to gentle.
Pace: This is a slow-paced experience – not a hike or fitness walk. At different points during the program, we will be standing, sitting, walking or moving slowly on varying surfaces.
Wear comfortable shoes and dress for the weather. With lower outdoor temperatures, it is important to dress warmly and in layers since this program is slow-paced and can include sitting. In the event of inclement weather, we will adapt the program to take place under cover and indoors at the Frick’s education center.
With lower outdoor temperatures, it is important to dress warmly and in layers since this program is slow-paced and can include sitting.
In the event of inclement weather, we will adapt the program to take place under cover and indoors at the Frick’s education center.
Water will be available to carry with you during the forest bathing portion of the program. Water bottles are not permitted in the Frick Art Museum.
About the Presenters
Patty Himes , Naturalist Educator Kathryn Hunninen , Senior Manager of Special Initiatives
Patty and Kathryn are Pittsburgh Parks Conservancy staff members and certified forest bathing guides through the Association of Nature and Forest Therapy Guides and Programs. Patty and Kathryn are excited to share with others their love of nature and its potential for healing. They bring over 45 years of combined experience connecting people to their parks and the natural world.