Meanwhile, the Americans at Valley Forge survived the hungry winter of 1777−78, which was made worse by quartermaster and commissary mismanagement, graft of contractors, and unwillingness of farmers to sell produce for paper money. Order and discipline among the troops were improved by the arrival of the Freiherr von (baron of) Steuben , a Prussian officer in the service of France . Steuben instituted a training program in which he emphasized drilling by officers, marching in column, and using firearms more effectively.
The program paid off at Monmouth Court House , New Jersey , on June 28, 1778, when Washington attacked the British, who were withdrawing from Philadelphia to New York . Although Sir Henry Clinton , who had replaced Howe, struck back hard, the Americans stood their ground, as exemplified by Molly Pitcher , whose legend as the heroine of the battle spread afterward. Thereafter (except in the winter of 1779, which was spent at Morristown) Washington made his headquarters at West Point on the Hudson, and Clinton avowed himself too weak to attack him there.
French aid now materialized with the appearance of a strong fleet under the comte d’Estaing . Unable to enter New York harbor , d’Estaing tried to assist Maj. Gen. John Sullivan in dislodging the British from Newport , Rhode Island . Storms and British reinforcements thwarted the joint effort.
Setbacks in the North
Action in the North was largely a stalemate for the rest of the war . The British raided New Bedford , Massachusetts , and New Haven and New London , Connecticut , while loyalists and Indigenous forces attacked settlements in New York and Pennsylvania . The Americans under “Mad” Anthony Wayne stormed Stony Point , New York, on July 16, 1779, and “Light-Horse Harry” Lee took Paulus Hook, New Jersey, on August 19.
More lasting in effect was Sullivan’s expedition of August 1779 against Britain’s Indigenous allies in New York, particularly the destruction of their villages and fields of corn. Farther west, Col. George Rogers Clark campaigned against British posts on the northwest frontier. With a company of volunteers, Clark captured Kaskaskia , the chief post in the Illinois country, on July 4, 1778, and later secured the submission of Vincennes . The latter was recaptured by Gen. Henry Hamilton, the British commander at Detroit , but, in the spring of 1779, Clark raised another force and retook Vincennes from Hamilton. That expedition did much to free the frontier from raids by Indigenous peoples, gave American settlers a hold upon the northwest, and encouraged expansion into the Ohio valley .
More From Britannica
United States: The American Revolution and the early federal republic
Potentially serious blows to the American cause were Benedict Arnold ’s efforts to surrender his army post to the British in 1780 and the army mutinies of 1780 and 1781. Arnold’s attempt to betray West Point miscarried, and his British contact, Maj. John André , was captured by the Americans and hanged as a spy. Mutinies were sparked by misunderstandings over terms of enlistment, poor food and clothing, gross arrears of pay, and the decline in the purchasing power of the dollar. Suppressed by force or negotiation, the mutinies shook the morale of the army.
Final campaigns in the South and the surrender of Cornwallis
British strategy since 1778 had called for offensives that were designed to take advantage of the flexibility of sea power and the loyalist sentiment of many of the people. British forces from New York and St. Augustine , Florida , occupied Georgia by the end of January 1779. Gen. Augustine Prevost, who had commanded in Florida, made Savannah his headquarters and defended that city in the fall against d’Estaing and a Franco-American army. Hrabia (count) Kazimierz Pułaski , a Polish officer who was serving on the American side, was mortally wounded in an unsuccessful assault on Savannah on October 9, 1779.
Having failed to achieve any decisive advantage in the North in 1779, Clinton headed a combined military and naval expedition southward. He evacuated Newport on October 25, left New York under the command of German Gen. Wilhelm, Freiherr von Knyphausen , and in December sailed with some 8,500 soldiers to join Prevost in Savannah. Cornwallis accompanied him, and later Lord Rawdon joined him with an additional force.
Marching on Charleston , Clinton cut off the city from relief and, after a brief siege , compelled Gen. Benjamin Lincoln to surrender on May 12, 1780. The loss of Charleston and the 5,000 troops of its garrison—virtually the entire Continental Army in the South—was a serious blow to the American cause. Learning that Newport was threatened by a French expeditionary force under the comte de Rochambeau , Clinton returned to New York in June, leaving Cornwallis at Charleston.
Cornwallis, however, took the offensive. On August 16 he shattered General Gates’s army at Camden , South Carolina , and German Continental Army officer Johann Kalb was mortally wounded in the fighting. The destruction of a force of loyalists at Kings Mountain on October 7 led Cornwallis to move against the new American commander, Gen. Nathanael Greene . When Greene put part of his force under Gen. Daniel Morgan , Cornwallis sent his cavalry leader, Col. Banastre Tarleton , after Morgan.
At Cowpens on January 17, 1781, Morgan destroyed practically all of Tarleton’s column. Subsequently, on March 15, Greene and Cornwallis fought at Guilford Courthouse , North Carolina . Cornwallis won but suffered heavy casualties . After withdrawing to Wilmington , he marched into Virginia to join British forces sent there by Clinton.
Greene then moved back to South Carolina, where he was defeated by Rawdon at Hobkirk’s Hill on April 25 and at Ninety Six in June and by Lieut. Col. Alexander Stewart at Eutaw Springs on September 8. In spite of that, the British—harassed by partisan leaders such as Francis Marion (whose guerrilla tactics earned him the nickname “the Swamp Fox”), Thomas Sumter , and Andrew Pickens—soon retired to the coast and remained locked up in Charleston and Savannah.
Meanwhile, Cornwallis entered Virginia , reaching Petersburg on May 20, 1781. Sending Tarleton on raids across the colony, the British asserted a sphere of control as far north as Fredericksburg and west to Charlottesville . There Thomas Jefferson , then the governor of Virginia, barely escaped capture by Tarleton’s troops. Cornwallis started to build a base at Yorktown , at the same time fending off American forces under Wayne, Steuben, and the marquis de Lafayette .
Learning that the comte de Grasse had arrived in the Chesapeake with a large fleet and 3,000 French troops, Washington and Rochambeau moved south to Virginia. By mid-September the Franco-American forces had placed Yorktown under siege , and British rescue efforts proved fruitless. Cornwallis surrendered his army of more than 7,000 soldiers on October 19, 1781. For the second time during the war, the British had lost an entire army.
Thereafter, land action in America died out, though the war persisted in other theaters and on the high seas . Eventually Clinton was replaced by Sir Guy Carleton . While the peace treaties were under consideration and afterward, Carleton evacuated thousands of loyalists from America, including many from Savannah on July 11, 1782, and others from Charleston on December 14.
The last British forces finally left New York on November 25, 1783. Washington then reentered the city in triumph.