Table of Contents Quick Summary Ask the Chatbot a Question
On July 3, 1775, Washington assumed command of the American forces at Cambridge. Not only did he have to contain the British in Boston, but he also had to recruit a Continental army. During the winter of 1775–76 recruitment lagged so badly that fresh drafts of militia were called up to help maintain the siege.
The balance shifted in late winter, when Gen. Henry Knox arrived with artillery from Fort Ticonderoga in New York. The British fort, which occupied a strategic point between Lake George and Lake Champlain , had been surprised and taken on May 10, 1775, by the Green Mountain Boys , a Vermont militia group under the command of Col. Ethan Allen . The cannons from Ticonderoga were mounted on Dorchester Heights, above Boston. The guns forced Howe, who had replaced Gage in command in October 1775, to evacuate the city on March 17, 1776. Howe then repaired to Halifax to prepare for an invasion of New York, and Washington moved units southward for its defense.
Meanwhile, action flared in the North. In the fall of 1775 the Americans invaded Canada . One force under Gen. Richard Montgomery captured Montreal on November 13. Another under Benedict Arnold made a remarkable march through the Maine wilderness to Quebec . Unable to take the city, Arnold was joined by Montgomery, many of whose troops had gone home because their enlistments had expired. An attack on the city on the last day of the year failed, Montgomery was killed, and many troops were captured. The Americans maintained a siege of the city but withdrew with the arrival of British reinforcements in the spring.
Pursued by the British and decimated by smallpox , the Americans fell back to Ticonderoga. British Gen. Guy Carleton ’s hopes of moving quickly down Lake Champlain, however, were frustrated by Arnold’s construction of a fighting fleet. Forced to build one of his own, Carleton destroyed most of the American fleet in October 1776 but considered the season too advanced to bring Ticonderoga under siege.
As the Americans suffered defeat in Canada, so did the British in the South. North Carolina patriots trounced a body of loyalists at Moore’s Creek Bridge on February 27, 1776. Charleston , South Carolina , was successfully defended against a British assault by sea in June.
Britannica Quiz
Pick Your Battles Quiz
The battle for New York
Having made up its mind to crush the rebellion, the British government sent General Howe and his brother, Richard, Admiral Lord Howe , with a large fleet and 34,000 British and German troops to New York . It also gave the Howes a commission to treat with the Americans. The British force sailed on June 10, 1776, from Halifax to New York and on July 5 encamped on Staten Island . The Continental Congress , which had proclaimed the independence of the colonies, at first thought that the Howes were empowered to negotiate peace terms but discovered that they were authorized only to accept submission and assure pardons.
Their peace efforts getting nowhere, the Howes turned to force. Washington, who had anticipated British designs, had already marched from Boston to New York and fortified the city, but his position was far from ideal. His left flank was thrown across the East River , beyond the village of Brooklyn , while the remainder of his lines fronted the Hudson River , making them open to a combined naval and ground attack. The position was untenable since the British absolutely dominated the waters about Manhattan . Howe drove Washington out of New York and forced the abandonment of the whole of Manhattan Island by employing three well-directed movements upon the American left.
On August 22, 1776, under his brother’s guns, General Howe crossed the narrows to the Long Island shore with 15,000 troops, increasing the number to 20,000 on the 25th. He then scored a smashing victory on August 27, driving the Americans into their Brooklyn works and inflicting a loss of about 1,400 troops. Washington skillfully evacuated his army from Brooklyn to Manhattan that night under cover of a fog.
On September 15 Howe followed up his victory by invading Manhattan . Though checked at Harlem Heights the next day, he drew Washington off the island in October by a move to Throg’s Neck and then to New Rochelle , northeast of the city. Leaving garrisons at Fort Washington on Manhattan and at Fort Lee on the opposite shore of the Hudson River , Washington hastened to block Howe. The British commander, however, defeated him on October 28 at Chatterton Hill near White Plains . Howe slipped between the American army and Fort Washington and stormed the fort on November 16, seizing guns, supplies, and nearly 3,000 prisoners.
British forces under Lord Cornwallis then took Fort Lee and on November 24 started to drive the American army across New Jersey . Though Washington escaped to the west bank of the Delaware River , his army nearly disappeared. Howe then put his army into winter quarters, with outposts at towns such as Bordentown and Trenton .
On Christmas night Washington struck back with a brilliant riposte. Crossing the ice-strewn Delaware with 2,400 troops, he fell upon the Hessian garrison at Trenton at dawn and took nearly 1,000 prisoners. Though almost trapped by Cornwallis, who recovered Trenton on January 2, 1777, Washington made a skillful escape during the night, won a battle against British reinforcements at Princeton the next day, and went into winter quarters in the defensible area around Morristown . The Trenton-Princeton campaign roused the country and saved the struggle for independence from collapse.
A British general surrenders, and the French prepare for war
Britain’s strategy in 1777 aimed at driving a wedge between New England and the other colonies. An army under Gen. John Burgoyne was to march south from Canada and join forces with Howe on the Hudson. But Howe seems to have concluded that Burgoyne was strong enough to operate on his own and left New York in the summer, taking his army by sea to the head of Chesapeake Bay . Once ashore, Howe defeated Washington badly but not decisively at Brandywine Creek on September 11.
Then, feinting westward, Howe entered Philadelphia , the American capital, on September 25. The Continental Congress fled to York . Washington struck back at Germantown on October 4 but, compelled to withdraw, went into winter quarters at Valley Forge .
In the North the story was different. Burgoyne was to move south to Albany with a force of about 9,000 British, Germans, Indigenous people, and American loyalists; a smaller force under Lieut. Col. Barry St. Leger was to converge on Albany through the Mohawk valley. Burgoyne took Ticonderoga handily on July 5 and then, instead of using Lake George, chose a southward route by land. Slowed by the rugged terrain, strewn with trees cut down by Americans under Gen. Philip Schuyler , and needing horses, Burgoyne sent a force of Germans to collect them at Bennington , Vermont. The Germans were nearly wiped out on August 16 by New Englanders under Gen. John Stark and Col. Seth Warner.
Meanwhile, St. Leger besieged Fort Schuyler (present-day Rome , New York), ambushed a relief column of American militia at Oriskany on August 6, but retreated as his forces gave up the siege and American troops under Arnold approached. Burgoyne himself reached the Hudson, but the Americans, now under Gen. Horatio Gates , checked him at Freeman’s Farm on September 19 and, thanks to Arnold’s battlefield leadership, decisively defeated him at Bemis Heights on October 7. Ten days later, unable to get help from New York , Burgoyne surrendered at Saratoga .
The most significant result of Burgoyne’s capitulation was the entrance of France into the war . The French had secretly furnished financial and material aid to the Americans since 1776. Now they prepared fleets and armies, although they did not formally declare war until June 1778.