Though the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff envisaged no major offensive westward across the Pacific toward Formosa until mid-1944, they nevertheless decided to launch a limited offensive in the central Pacific in 1943, hoping thereby both to speed the pace of the war and to draw the Japanese away from other areas. Accordingly, Nimitz’ central Pacific forces invaded the Gilberts on November 23, 1943. Makin fell easily, but well-fortified Japanese defenses on Tarawa cost the U.S. Marines 1,000 killed and 2,300 wounded. Japanese losses in the Gilberts totaled about 8,500 men.
Having been forced to cede the Gilberts, the Japanese elected next to defend the Marshalls , in order both to absorb Allied forces and to strain the latters’ extended lines of supply. Nimitz subjected Kwajalein Atoll , which he chose first to attack, to so heavy a preliminary bombardment that the U.S. infantry could land on it on January 31, 1944; and U.S. forces moved on to Enewetak on February 17.
In support of the landings on the Marshalls, the U.S. fleet on February 17, 1944, started a series of day and night attacks against the Japanese base at Truk in the Caroline Islands , where they destroyed some 300 aircraft and 200,000 tons of merchant shipping. Henceforth, the Allies could confidently ignore Truk and bypass it.
The Allies’ next objective, for which they required more than 500 ships and 125,000 troops, was to reduce the Mariana Islands , lying 1,000 miles from Enewetak and 3,500 miles from Pearl Harbor . Against this threat, after the destruction at Truk, the Japanese hastily drew up a new defense plan, “ Operation A,” relying on their remaining 1,055 land-based aircraft in the Marianas, in the Carolines, and in western New Guinea and on timely and decisive intervention by a sea force, which should include nine aircraft carriers with 450 aircraft. But in the spring of 1944 the Japanese air strength was still further depleted, and, moreover, on March 31 the sponsor of the plan, Admiral Koga Mineichi (Yamamoto’s successor), and his staff were killed in an air disaster. When, on June 15, two U.S. Marine divisions went ashore on Saipan Island in the Marianas, the 30,000 Japanese defenders put up so fierce a resistance that an army division was needed to reinforce the Marines. Using the same defensive tactics as on other small islands, the Japanese had fortified themselves in underground caves and bunkers that afforded protection from American artillery and naval bombardment. Notwithstanding this, the Japanese defenders were gradually compressed into smaller and smaller pockets, and they themselves ended most organized resistance with a suicidal counterattack on July 7, the largest of its kind during the war.
The loss of Saipan was such a disaster for Japan that when the news was announced in Tokyo the prime minister , Tōjō Hideki , and his entire Cabinet resigned. To realists in the Japanese high command, the loss of the Marianas spelled the ultimate loss of the war, but no one dared say so. Tōjō’s Cabinet was succeeded by that of General Koiso Kuniaki , which was pledged to carrying on the fight with renewed vigour.
Air power enthusiasts have called the conquest of Saipan “the turning point of the war in the Pacific,” for it enabled the United States to establish air bases there for the big B-29 bombers, which had been developed for the specific purpose of bombing Japan. The first flight of 100 B-29s took off from Saipan on November 24, 1944, and bombed Tokyo, the first bombing raid on the Japanese capital since 1942.
While the Japanese were still resisting on Saipan, the Japanese Combined Fleet, under Admiral Ozawa Jisaburō , was approaching from Philippine and East Indian anchorages, in accordance with “Operation A,” to challenge the U.S. 5th Fleet, under Admiral Raymond Spruance . Ozawa, with only nine aircraft carriers against 15 for the United States, was obviously inferior in naval power, but he counted heavily on help from land-based aircraft on Guam, Rota, and Yap. The encounter, which took place west of the Marianas and is known as the Battle of the Philippine Sea , has been called the greatest carrier battle of the war. It began on June 19 when Ozawa sent 430 planes in four waves against Spruance’s ships. The result was a disaster for the Japanese. U.S. airmen shot down more than 300 planes and sank two carriers, and as the Japanese fleet retreated northward toward Okinawa it lost another carrier and almost 100 more planes. The United States lost about 130 planes. The hasty and incomplete training of the Japanese pilots and the inadequate armour plating of their planes were decisive factors in the numerous aerial combats of this battle, which was ultimately of more strategic importance than the fall of Saipan. Nimitz’ forces could thereafter occupy other major islands in the Marianas: Guam on July 21 and Tinian on July 24. The Marianas cost the Japanese 46,000 killed or captured, the Americans only 4,750 killed.