Just 10 days after Pickett’s Charge at Gettysburg, a draft riot broke out in New York City and quickly turned into a race riot. At least 120 people were killed in the five-day melee, which remains one of the deadliest episodes of civil unrest in American history. This was neither the first nor the last draft riot to take place in the North, however. In fact, the last major riot would occur in March 1864 in Charleston , Illinois, one of the towns that had hosted a Lincoln-Douglas debate in 1858.
It was the Confederates, however, who had resorted to a draft first, in April 1862. All healthy Southern white men between ages 18 and 35 were required to serve three years (ultimately, this would be extended to men between ages 17 and 50). Those whose occupations were critical to society or the war effort were exempt from military service , and until December 1863 a wealthy man could hire a substitute to serve in his place. The most controversial element of the Confederate conscription was the “Twenty-Slave” law, which allowed one white man from a plantation with 20 or more slaves to avoid service during the war. This was in part a response to the pleas of many Southern women, who were unprepared for and overwhelmed by the responsibility of running plantations on their own and managing a significant number of slaves. The exemption stirred cries from yeomen farmers that this had become “a rich man’s war but a poor man’s fight.”
The U.S. Congress resorted to the first draft in the country’s history in March 1863. As with the Confederates the year before, the inflow of volunteers was drying up, and the Union needed to keep the ranks filled. All able-bodied men between ages 20 and 45 were required to be enrolled and available for military service. Draftees were chosen by lottery. Once conscripted, a man could avoid service for that particular round of the draft either by paying a $300 commutation fee or by hiring a substitute to take his place. As in the South, this raised accusations that the war had become “a rich man’s war but a poor man’s fight.” Nevertheless, in both North and South, statistics indicate that wealthy men were represented in the service in at least the same proportion as they were in the general population.