Table of Contents Quick Summary Ask the Chatbot a Question
The colony of Massachusetts was seen by King George III and his ministers as the hotbed of disloyalty. After the Boston Tea Party (December 16, 1773), Parliament responded with the Intolerable Acts (1774), a series of punitive measures that were intended to cow the restive population into obedience. The 1691 charter of the Massachusetts Bay Colony was abrogated , and the colony’s elected ruling council was replaced with a military government under Gen. Thomas Gage , the commander of all British troops in North America . At Gage’s headquarters in Boston , he had four regiments—perhaps 4,000 troops—under his command, and Parliament deemed that force sufficient to overawe the population in his vicinity. William Legge, 2nd earl of Dartmouth , secretary of state for the colonies, advised Gage that
the violence committed by those, who have taken up arms in Massachusetts, have appeared to me as the acts of a rude rabble, without plan, without concert, without conduct.
From London, Dartmouth concluded that
a small force now, if put to the test, would be able to conquer them, with greater probability of success, than might be expected of a larger army, if the people should be suffered to form themselves upon a more regular plan.
Gage, for his part, thought that no fewer than 20,000 troops would be adequate for such an endeavor, but he acted with the forces he had at hand. Beginning in the late summer of 1774, Gage attempted to suppress the warlike preparations throughout New England by seizing stores of weapons and powder . Although the colonials were initially taken by surprise, they soon mobilized. Groups such as the Sons of Liberty uncovered advance details of British actions, and Committees of Correspondence aided in the organization of countermeasures. Learning of a British plan to secure the weapons cache at Fort William and Mary, an undermanned army outpost in Portsmouth , New Hampshire , Boston’s Committee of Correspondence dispatched Paul Revere on December 13, 1774, to issue a warning to local allies.
The following day, several hundred soldiers assembled and stormed the fort, capturing the six-man garrison, seizing a significant quantity of powder, and striking the British colors; a subsequent party removed the remaining cannons and small arms. That act of open violence against the crown infuriated British officials, but their attempts to deprive the incipient rebellion of vital war matériel over the following months were increasingly frustrated by colonial leaders who denuded British supply caches and sequestered arms and ammunition in private homes.
On April 14, 1775, Gage received a letter from Dartmouth informing him that Massachusetts had been declared to be in a state of open revolt and ordering him to “arrest and imprison the principal Actors and Abettors in the [Massachusetts] Provincial Congress.” Gage had received his orders, but the colonials were well aware of his intentions before he could act.
Paul Revere’s ride and the Battles of Lexington and Concord
On April 16 Revere rode to Concord , a town 20 miles (32 km) northwest of Boston, to advise local compatriots to secure their military stores in advance of British troop movements. Two nights later Revere rode from Charlestown —where he confirmed that the local Sons of Liberty had seen the two lanterns that were posted in Boston’s Old North Church, signaling a British approach across the Charles River —to Lexington to warn that the British were on the march.
Revolutionary leaders John Hancock and Samuel Adams fled Lexington to safety, and Revere was joined by fellow riders William Dawes and Samuel Prescott. The trio were apprehended outside Lexington by a British patrol, but Prescott escaped custody and was able to continue on to Concord. Revere’s “midnight ride” provided the colonists with vital information about British intentions, and it was later immortalized in a poem by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow .
Some 700 British troops spent the evening of April 18, 1775, forming ranks on Boston Common, with orders to seize the colonial armory at Concord . The lengthy public display ensured that Gage had lost any chance at secrecy, and by the time the force had been transported across the Charles River to Cambridge it was 2:00 am the following morning.
The march to Lexington was an exercise in misery. It began in a swamp, and the British were forced to wade through brackish water that was, in places, waist deep. By the time the soaked infantry members arrived in Lexington about 5:00 am , 77 minutemen were among those who had assembled on the village green. Officers on both sides ordered their troops to hold their positions but not to fire their weapons.
It is unclear who fired “the shot heard ’round the world,” but it sparked a skirmish that left eight Americans dead. The colonial force evaporated, and the British moved on to Concord, where they were met with determined resistance from hundreds of militia members. Now outnumbered and running low on ammunition, the British column was forced to retire to Boston. On the return march, American snipers took a deadly toll on the British, and only the timely arrival of 1,100 reinforcements prevented the retreat from becoming a rout. Those killed and wounded at the Battles of Lexington and Concord numbered 273 British and 95 Americans.
The Siege of Boston and the Battle of Bunker Hill
Rebel militia then converged on Boston from all over New England, while London attempted to formulate a response. Generals Sir William Howe , Sir Henry Clinton , and John Burgoyne were dispatched at once with reinforcements, and Charles Cornwallis followed later. Those four commanders would be identified with the conduct of the principal British operations.
The Continental Congress in Philadelphia , acting for the 13 colonies, voted for general defensive measures, called out troops, and appointed George Washington of Virginia commander in chief. Before Washington could take charge of the 15,000 colonial troops laying siege to the British garrison in Boston, Gage ordered Howe to drive the Americans from the heights in Charlestown.
The Americans provoked the assault by entrenching on Breed’s Hill, the lower of two hills overlooking the British position. The placement of American artillery on the heights would have made the British position in Boston untenable , so on June 17, 1775, Howe led a British frontal assault on the American fortifications.
In the misleadingly named Battle of Bunker Hill (Breed’s Hill was the primary locus of combat), Howe’s 2,300 troops encountered withering fire while storming the rebel lines. The British eventually cleared the hill but at the cost of more than 40 percent of the assault force, and the battle was a moral victory for the Americans.