BUILDING
Rental Rates
Our current rental rates can be found on our website: https://www.pittsburghopera.org/facilities/hold-your-event-at-pittsburgh-opera/rental-information
Load-in & Load-out Policy
A full-day rental includes 12 hours from set-up to end of your event, plus one hour for clean-up. Access will be given to Social Tables for lessees to place objects around the space. Pittsburgh Opera event staff will set up the items as noted on Social Tables prior to lessee’s arrival.
Lessees will inform Pittsburgh Opera staff of any rentals associated with their event. Drop off and pick up times must be coordinated prior to the event. Vendor drop offs are allowed the day prior to your event within the hours of 9:30am-1:30pm. Lessee will be charged an additional hourly fee for a ceremony rehearsal or drop off and set up of personal items, décor, etc. on the day prior to the event.
It is preferred that all personal items must be removed from the building at the end of the event, however, if prior arrangements are made, items may be picked up at a later date. Rented items may be left and picked up on the next business day between 9:30am-1:30pm, with approval from Pittsburgh Opera.
Additional Security
The staffing fee for each event covers one (1) security guard, hired by PO, for the duration of your Event Time and one (1) PO staff member.
Upper Level of GRW Access
Guests may NOT access the upper level of the GRW. We will allow individuals up to the second level to put up and take down decorations. We will also allow photographer or videographer limited access the upper level.
Restricted Items
The following items are prohibited from use in the George Roland White Studio, Founders’ Room, and other associated spaces:
Helium-filled balloons
Confetti, glitter, beads, or similar loose items
Feather boas
Sparklers or other pyrotechnic instruments
Gas/wood-fueled burners (Sternos are permitted)
Hay or straw
Unprotected taper candles
Bubbles or foam machines
Champagne towers or spraying of champagne indoors
Smoking is not permitted on the Premises, including the garage area. Use of electronic cigarettes is also prohibited. Smoking shall only be permitted at designated areas outside of the garage area as defined by Pittsburgh Opera.
In accordance with Pennsylvania State law, Lessee shall not permit the use of any illegal drugs in or about the Premises at any time.
Guest Arrival
There are two large Pittsburgh Opera signs on Liberty Avenue and two A-frame signs are placed at the entrance and exit of the parking garage. We do recommend that volunteers stand at the entrance and exit to the garage for your guests’ ease of mind. These volunteers can answer questions about parking or the event in general.
VENDORS
Preferred Vendors
Pittsburgh Opera has no requirements about vendors, so you can feel free to use any caterer, DJ, photographer, etc. that best suits your budget and taste. A list of preferred Pittsburgh Opera vendors can be provided upon request.
Kitchen Access
Pittsburgh Opera has a small kitchen that the caterer may use for prep work. Because of poor ventilation, however, this is a warming kitchen and cannot accommodate cooking. If your menu requires on-site cooking, most caterers will set up a kitchen in the parking garage, where ventilation is not a factor.
Alcohol Policy
You are responsible for bringing in your own alcohol for the event, if desired. Many caterers will provide alcohol and bartenders for your event, at your request. Our only stipulation with the bar is that, due to PA liquor laws, you cannot sell alcohol on site, so the bar must be an open bar.
Announcements & Music
Pittsburgh Opera will not provide A/V equipment for your event. If you wish to have music or announcements made, it is recommended to hire a DJ.
AMENITIES
Ice Machine/Ice Storage
Unfortunately, we do not have an ice machine. We do, however, have an ice chest located in the kitchen that can hold approximately 4-5 bags of ice. You will need to provide the ice. If you bring coolers with extra ice, they must be kept in the garage.
Guest Parking
Events have use of our parking garage on a first-come, first-served basis. While we will strive to ensure that at least some of your guests have use of this convenience, full use of the garage is not guaranteed. If our garage is full, other options include street parking (which is metered below 25 th Street), the $10 lot at the corner of Penn Avenue and 24 th Street (1 block from the Opera), and the $6 garage at the corner of Smallman Street and 24 th Street (2 blocks from the Opera). The lot across from the Opera on Liberty Avenue is a private lot and not available for rental. Many rental groups arrange for a shuttle service for their guests, though this is by no means required.
Two of our preferred vendors – D & P Valet and The Hub – can also provide parking services. D & P Valet can be onsite to valet guests’ cars. The Hub will set up an account with the Lessee to allow guest’s parking fees to be billed to the Lessee directly.
Pittsburgh Opera Tables and Chairs
Providing our equipment isn’t being used for another event in the building, the Opera has the following:
1 10 25 6 5 10 2 5 300
1 10 25 6 5 10 2 5 300
72” round table (seats up to 10 people) 60” round tables (seats up to 8 people) 30” low round tables (seats up to 4 people) 26” high round tables 8’ x 24” rectangle tables 6’ x 24” rectangular utility tables 5’ bar units black leather chairs banquet chairs (maroon with gold trim) banquet chairs (maroon with gold trim)
72” round table (seats up to 10 people) 60” round tables (seats up to 8 people) 30” low round tables (seats up to 4 people) 26” high round tables 8’ x 24” rectangle tables 6’ x 24” rectangular utility tables 5’ bar units black leather chairs banquet chairs (maroon with gold trim) banquet chairs (maroon with gold trim)
Piano Use
Pittsburgh Opera usually keeps a grand piano in each room but they are removed if not being used.   If your group is interested in using a piano, a small piano tuning fee will be added to your final invoice. Pittsburgh Opera does NOT supply a pianist, so you will be required to hire one of your own.
ADMINISTRATIVE
Administrative Fees
$150 insurance fee covers general liability for insurance for the space. If you wish to purchase more coverage or are looking for additional, generic event insurance, then you may purchase additional plans.
$450 staffing fee covers a Pittsburgh Opera staff member to be on-site for the entirety of your rental from set-up to clean-up and a third-party security guard hired by Pittsburgh Opera. PO staff will ensure building systems are working throughout and stay clean during your event, along with basic support of PO equipment.
$150 cleaning fee covers the additional cleaning of the event space, floors, , bathrooms, and kitchen.