2025-2026
Art
History
Nature
PROGRAMS FOR STUDENTS
K-12
7227 Reynolds St.
Pittsburgh PA
15208
Booking: What you need to know
Book early! Certain times of the year (like October, December, and May) fill more quickly
than others.
Programs must be scheduled and finalized at least six weeks in advance; more is
preferred.
Lunchroom use and time is included in some longer programs. Look for the icon. If
lunch time is not part of your program, facilities may be available for $30. Ask when you
book and remember to add 30 minutes to your visit.
Not sure which program is best for you? Check out the a la carte options or reach out. We
are happy to help you customize a program to fit your needs!
Only interested in touring one of our museums? Guided tours of the museum of your
choice are available.
The earliest time that a field trip can begin is 9:30 a.m.
Occasionally, certain programs may be temporarily unavailable due to special events,
traveling exhibitions, or onsite closures.
Winter months: January and February
Seasons at the Frick
offer more flexibility in available dates.
Peak seasons: Clayton Consider scheduling a field trip during
programs in October, this time to save $2 per student.
December, and May sell
out quickly. Book early if Weather issues: If any weather-related
you would like to take a delay or cancellation for your school
field trip during these district results in a field trip cancellation,
months! we will do our best to reschedule! If that
isn’t possible, you will receive a full refund.
As part of our continued commitment to keeping our staff and visitors safe,
The Frick Pittsburgh has put the following policies in place:
AIR QUALITY AND OUTDOOR PROGRAMS
If the Air Quality Index indicates Purple, or "Very Unhealthy" air quality, all outdoor
programs will be canceled. We will do our best to reschedule, but if that is not possible,
these programs will receive a full refund.
For air quality rating other than “Very Unhealthy,” the Frick will defer to the school's policy
on air quality guidance.
HEALTH AND WELLNESS
To help keep all visitors and staff safe, students who have a confirmed, contagious illness
must remain at school or at home. The Frick will refund the cost of that student’s ticket.
Any student with visible symptoms of illness may be sent home or be asked to remain in a
separate space; if their symptoms are believed to be caused by a non-contagious illness,
Frick staff will provide a mask for that student to wear for the duration of their visit.
Schools may request that the Frick’s museum educators who work directly with their
students wear face masks to protect students from illness.
KN95 masks are available on-site by request.
How to schedule your visit
Please note that space is limited, and we recommend that you
contact us at least six weeks prior to your preferred field trip date.
To book a field trip, please click this link to fill out
a virtual booking request. You will then be
contacted by someone on the education team
within *five business days.
*Response times may be longer close to holidays
Let us know
Your name, contact information, and school
Date you would like to visit
The field trips or museums that interest you
Grade(s) and the total number of students and
chaperones
Ways this field trip relates to your curriculum
Accessibility requests
Have questions?
Contact us!
Email
Education@theFrickPittsburgh.org
or call 412-342-4087
Real art.
Real history.
Real learning.
The Frick Pittsburgh offers a range of hands-on field trips for students K-12 and we are eager
to work directly with you to customize tours and activities to best meet your classroom's
needs. Frick field trips address cross-curricular standards, integrating writing, art and science
to broaden student perspectives. This digital booklet has everything you need to begin
planning a rewarding and unforgettable experience for your students.
Site
Map
Clayton The Frick Art Museum The Car & Carriage Museum
The greenhouse Bus parking Education Center classrooms
Chaperone policy
Bus parking
Based on the size of your group,
we admit a certain number of While our parking lot is
chaperones for free. Reach out for beautiful and has space for
more detailed information many visitors, it cannot
regarding how many chaperones accommodate buses, even to
are included for your field trip turn around. Luckily, street
package and grade level. parking is free!
Any additional chaperones will be The day we expect your
charged as participants at the group, we will set out orange
student rate. Reserved Parking signs along
the Reynolds St. sidewalk to
Chaperones should be prepared to save a parking spot for your
assist as needed with student bus.
behavior, bathroom breaks, and
general group management.
à la carte field trip options
Build your own field trip! Each museum tour is adaptable based on factors
like age, school curriculum, and student interest.
Maximum of three museums or activities per field trip. Capacity limits vary
depending on your selected number of activities and range between 8 - 90
students.
Museum tours:
Clayton is the remarkable, original Gilded Age home of the Frick family, a
one-of-a-kind tool for learning about life in 19th-century Pittsburgh.
Our signature Gilded, Not Golden tour of Clayton, adapted from the
award-winning public tour of the same name, explores 1892, a
pivotal year for our nation, Pittsburgh, and the Frick family.
Throughout this tour, students will look under the “gilded” surface of
the late 19th century to reveal the era’s more complicated truths
while thinking about how the Gilded Age continues to impact us
today. This tour is available throughout the school year.
Recommended duration: 1.5 hours - 2 hours depending on age
Cost: $12 per student
Content advisory: 1892 was a tumultuous year for the Frick family and the
Pittsburgh steel industry. For this reason, tours of Clayton deal with potentially
challenging subject matter, including discussions of violence, grief, and child loss.
Enjoy a home decked out for the holidays on the Clayton Holiday
Tour, available from November 22 - January 4! During this special
tour, students will learn about life during the Gilded Age while
exploring how some beloved winter holiday traditions were
celebrated during the this period.
“[It was a] great program for my AP
Recommended duration: 1.5 hours US history students. Really
impressed that the Frick put
Cost: $12 per student
together a program to the rigor of
my AP level students.”
- Oakland Catholic High School, 11th grade
AP US history
à la carte field trip options
Museum tours:
The Frick Art Museum displays a collection of art that belonged to the
Frick family, as well as an ever-changing array of special exhibitions!
Special exhibitions this school year include The Scandinavian Home:
Landscape and Lore (on view from September 27 - January 11) and
another exciting spring exhibition that will be announced soon!
Recommended duration: 1 hour
Cost: $10 per student
The Car and Carriage Museum houses the Frick’s collection of historic
carriages and cars dating back to the turn of the 20th century! On this
tour, students will travel back to the time of horse-drawn carriages, see
some of the first horseless carriages to have an impact on Pittsburgh,
and learn how the development of the automobile came to be and how
it changed American life.
Recommended duration: 1 hour
Cost: $10 per student
à la carte field trip options
Add-on activities:
Create art in our classrooms with experienced art educators who will lead
artmaking designed to encourage both creativity and reflection of your
students' museum experience. This pairs equally well with any museum tour!
Recommended duration: 45 minutes - 1 hour 30 minutes
Cost: $4 per student
Appropriate for all ages
During the History Mystery activity, students will use clues, a matching game, and
the power of deduction to determine the purpose of Gilded Age tools! This pairs
best with a tour of Clayton.
Recommended duration: 30 minutes
Cost: $2 per student
Most appropriate for students in grades 2-5
The assembly-line activity teaches students how an assembly line works through
direct experience! Participants work together to assemble small toy cars, and can
compete to see which groups work the fastest. This pairs best with a tour of the Car
& Carriage Museum.
Recommended duration: 30 minutes
Cost: $2 per student
Most appropriate for students in grades 3-12
Capital Contest teaches students about wealth distribution in capitalism through
an interactive game! This pairs best with a Gilded, not Golden tour of Clayton.
Recommended duration: 30 minutes
Cost: $2 per student
Most appropriate for students in grades 8-12
For the majority of our students, this was their
first experience in a museum. The way that
Frick is able to make the visit developmentally
appropriate by incorporating songs and
movement makes it more accessible to all of
our young learners.
-Faison Elementary, Kindergarten
Ready-made Program Offerings
A Tuneful Trip to The Frick Studio Response (K -12)
(Pre K-2) Adaptable to any works within
Songs and games introduce art, The Frick Art Museum, students
history, and just how much fun a discuss themes and art-making
museum can be! techniques in the gallery before
This program can include your heading to the classroom to
choice of two out of any of our create their own works of art.
three museums: The Frick Art Group size: 8-35 students; up to
Museum, The Car & Carriage 50 students when the museum
Museum, or Clayton. has a visiting exhibition
Group size: 8-50 students Fee: $12 per student
Fee: $12 per student Duration: 2.5 hours
Duration: 2.5 hours
The Chemistry of Color (2-5) Art & History Unite (3-12)
Combine art, science, history, and Encounter the collections of our
egg yolks! Students create tempera three museums in one visit through
paint, learn about color and art interactive activities tailored to
history, and tour our Italian art each grade level.
collection. Group size: 8-90 students
Group size: 8-35 students Fee: $14 per student
Fee: $14 per student Duration: 4 hours
Duration: 2.5 hours
Program Key
Hands-on project Greenhouse Time for lunch included
Frick Art Museum Clayton Car & Carriage Museum
"The content of the program was aligned perfectly with our goals.
Moreover, the program was interesting and slightly challenging so that
students were actively engaged for the duration."
-Norwin Middle School, 7th - 9th grade
Understanding Symbolism:
Changes in America:
Then and Now (4-9)
The Assembly Line (4-5)
Students "read" visual clues in
Transportation is a perfect way to
medieval paintings, explore
study the changes America
symbolism in their lives, and craft a
experienced moving from
triptych to represent their own
handcrafted to manufactured
experiences.
objects at the turn of the last
Group size: 8-30 students
century. Student crews experience a
Fee: $12 per student
moving assembly line as they race
Duration: 2.5 hours
the clock to build cars.
Group size: 8-35 students
Fee: $12 per student
Duration: 2.5 hours
Letterboxing: Geocaching, 19th-
Century Style! (4-6)
This outdoor exploration combines
problem-solving skills, cooperation,
The students all said that this was their
reading, and math in game learning!
best outing of the school year. They were
Teams read maps, decipher clues
telling other peers about all the cars.
and sight along compass lines to find They thought the assembly line activity
hidden letterboxes. Held rain or was cool and told others about it.
-Linton Middle School,
shine--dress for the weather.
grades 6-8
Group size: 8-35
Fee: $12 per student
Duration: 2 hours
Program Key
Hands-on project Greenhouse Time for lunch included
Frick Art Museum Clayton Car & Carriage Museum
Forging Capital:
Power in Pittsburgh (9-12)
This interactive Gilded, Not Golden
tour and accompanying workshop
looks under the “gilded” surface of
the late 19th century to reveal the
era’s layered truths. Students will
learn how Henry Frick and his
contemporaries including Andrew
Carnegie, Jane Grandison, and
George Westinghouse impacted
Pittsburgh during their time and
today.
Group size: 8-35 students
Art and Revolution in 18th
Fee: $15 per student
Century France (9-12)
Duration: 3 hours
After studying 18th century art,
furniture, and design, students
explore the dynamics of peasant
and court life that led to the
French Revolution. Choose the
tour alone or add an extensive
theater-based workshop!
Group size: 8-30 students
Fee: $10 per student (tour only);
$15 per student for tour and
workshop
Duration: 2 hours (tour) or 4 hours
(tour and workshop), including
lunch
Program Key
Hands-on activity Greenhouse Time for lunch included
Frick Art Museum Clayton Car & Carriage Museum
Multi-visit packages
Interested in coming to the museum more than once? Sign up for a field trip
package or reach out to create your own to experience all The Frick has to
offer in a series of visits throughout the school year!
SchMus (5-8)
Bring school to the museum in a series of field trips centered
around creative writing. Students will tour each of our
museums and accompanying special exhibitions throughout
6 field trips and will leave the program with a personalized
journal!
Group size: 8-35 students
Fee: $48 per student
Duration: 1.5 hours per visit; 6 visits total throughout the school
year
Program Key
Hands-on project Greenhouse Time for lunch included
Frick Art Museum Clayton Car & Carriage Museum