Museum Guidelines for Self-Guided Groups
The Frick Pittsburgh
Please review the following museum guidelines with members of your group before visiting the
Frick Pittsburgh. These guidelines set general expectations for behavior and are intended to help
everyone get the most out of their visit.
General Policies
 Food, drinks (including water), and gum are not allowed in any of the museum spaces.
Please be sure to discard these in a trash container outside or leave them on the bus or in
your vehicle.
 Large backpacks and bags are not allowed in museum spaces. Please leave them on your
group’s bus or in your vehicle. A limited number of lockers are available in the Grable
Visitor Center on a first-come, first-served basis.
 Writing utensils other than pencils are not allowed in any museum spaces.
 Priority is given to programs led by the Frick’s facilitators, museum educators, and other
staff members. Please be mindful of these groups in the museums and share the space
accordingly.
 Please be considerate of others. Please do not prevent others from moving through the
galleries by blocking walkways, doorways or exhibition displays.
 Please maintain a safe distance from artworks and artifacts. The galleries can get
crowded, so be mindful of clothing, purses, and bodies as you move through the spaces.
 The Frick Pittsburgh’s site is large and moving from one building to another can require
up to 10 to 15 minutes of walking. For more information, see our accessibility page.
 Free public restrooms are available in the Grable Visitor Center, the vestibule to the Car
and Carriage Museum, and an outdoor public bathroom is located across from the café.
Public restrooms in the café are also available to café patrons.
Arrival
 The Frick’s parking lot is free and can accommodate cars and small vans. The parking lot
cannot accommodate buses, even to turn around. All buses must utilize street parking.
 Reserved bus parking for self-guided groups is not available; it is recommend that buses
utilize street parking on Reynolds St. or South Lexington Ave. The Frick asks that self-
guided group buses do not park at the base of the steps to the Frick Art Museum on
Reynolds Street, as that space is reserved for guided groups. That reserved space is
clearly marked.
 A map of our site and its surrounding streets is included for your reference at the bottom
of this document.
The Frick Art Museum
 While access to The Frick Art Museum’s permanent collection is free, the museum also
regularly hosts visiting exhibitions that sometimes require paid admission. Check out the
exhibitions page on our website for up-to-date information about exhibitions currently
on view, ticketing, and more.
 There is no group rate admission for The Frick Art Museum.
 Non-flash photography is permitted in The Frick Art Museum.
 Information about group sketching options can be provided upon request by
education@TheFrickPittsburgh.org.
 The Frick Art Museum is fully wheelchair accessible.
 If you have questions about museum policies during your visit to The Frick Art Museum,
please consult a gallery attendant or museum experience associate.
The Car and Carriage Museum
 The Car and Carriage Museum is free and self-guided.
 Non-flash photography is permitted.
 The Car and Carriage Museum is fully wheelchair accessible.
 If you have questions about the museum policies during your visit, please consult the
gallery attendant on duty.
Clayton
 Admission to Clayton is by guided tour only.
 Public tours of Clayton cannot accommodate large groups (11 people or more). If you are
interested in booking a group tour of Clayton, advance reservation is required with a
minimum of six weeks’ notice. Contact 412-342-4087 or
Education@TheFrickPittsburgh.org for information.
The Greenhouse and Grounds
 Access to the grounds and greenhouse is free during business hours.
 Certain areas of the grounds are restricted and marked with “staff only” signs. Please do
not enter these areas.
 Picnic tables and seating are available throughout the grounds and are first-come, first-
served.
Dining
 The Frick Café offers counter service and has limited seating available to visitors on a
first-come, first-serve basis. Large orders for many individuals may require a long waiting
period.
 Outdoor seating at the Café is reserved for café patrons only. If bringing your own food,
please use the public picnic tables and seating around the site instead of the café patio.
 All picnic table seating is first-come, first served. In the case of inclement weather, indoor
seating for large groups is not available.
In Case of Emergency
 In the event of an emergency during your visit, please notify any Frick staff member
immediately.