Become a Member
Tap into the pulse of the Steel City – become a member of the Pittsburgh Downtown Partnership.
Your involvement is more than an investment in a vibrant city center; it’s about creating an inclusive and dynamic neighborhood in which to live, work and visit.
From the ever-expanding popularity of Picklesburgh, to the bustling outdoor dining scene, to dedicated services that keep our streets safe and clean, our mission is to foster a Downtown that is welcoming to all, and our members are vital part of everything we do.
As a member, you’ll join a diverse network of stakeholders who share in our vision for Downtown and the region as a whole. You’ll also gain access to exclusive resources and promotional support, including members-only events, networking opportunities, recognition on our website and social platforms, and special discounts and perks at PDP programs.
We invite you to join our community of like-minded organizations, businesses, and individuals who are dedicated to making Downtown a place we can all take pride in.
Download our member benefits brochure [pdf]
New Member Benefits – First Year Only (All Levels)
Welcome message on PDP’s LinkedIn page (12,000+ followers)
Profile write-up in ‘Membership Matters’ newsletter
Welcome pack of 5 Edge Cards
One complimentary ticket to PDP’s Annual Meeting ($25 ticket value)
Annual Member Benefits (All Levels)
Access to invitation-only ‘behind-the-scenes’ informational and networking events hosted by PDP, held on a quarterly basis
Access to, and listed in, a Directory of PDP Member Organizations
Annual Volunteer Day Downtown. Invitation to schedule a volunteer clean up day, hosted by PDP’s clean program
Two ‘Free Beer’ tickets at PDP’s Annual Picklesburgh festival
Special Discounts, as available, at PDP pop-up events and activations
Discount to membership at UFC GYM Pittsburgh . 25% off classes and other add-on benefits. Find full details here .
Free subscription to Pittsburgh Magazine
Listed in Pittsburgh Magazine as a supporter of PDP once a year
Strategic Discounts from Downtown Retailers through the PDP’s Edge Card program. Access to additional Edge Cards upon Request
Automatic subscriptions to PDP’s e-newsletters: LowDownTown, Perspectives, In The Know, and Membership Matters
Set up fee ($500) waived for a POGOH Corporate Membership , click here for more details.
Receive a 10% discount on sponsorships and print resources with Bike PGH – make your business more bike-friendly with Pittsburgh Bike Maps, Biking 101 guides, employee discounts to BikePGH events, and more. Click here for more details .
Free Registration ($250 value) and 50% off first month’s tuition with The Goddard School .
$79.95 pricing for all PDP members on a one hour massage or facial service at Hand and Stone Spa on Penn Avenue.
Additional Benefits
Downtown Patron
One additional complimentary ticket to PDP’s Annual Meeting in their first year (total of two tickets in their first year) – $50 ticket value
15% discount on tuition at Point Park University – for more information click here
Downtown Champion
One additional complimentary ticket to PDP’s Annual Meeting in their first year (total of two tickets in their first year) plus one complimentary ticket to PDP’s Annual Meeting annually – $50 ticket value in first year, $25 ticket value annually
Two complimentary tickets to PDP’s Light Up Night BLAST VIP Party in their first year, plus one complimentary ticket to PDP’s Light Up Night BLAST VIP Party annually – $200 ticket value in first year, $100 ticket value annually
15% discount on tuition at Point Park University – for more information click here
15% discount on tuition at select programs at Duquesne University, including the PMBA program
Downtown Visionary
One additional complimentary ticket to PDP’s Annual Meeting annually (total of two tickets annually) – $50 ticket value
Two complimentary ticket to PDP’s Light Up Night BLAST VIP Party – $200 ticket value
15% discount on tuition at Point Park University – for more information click here
15% discount on tuition at select programs at Duquesne University, including the PMBA program
Renaissance Leader
An additional three complimentary tickets to PDP’s Annual Meeting annually (total of four tickets annually) – $100 ticket value
Four complimentary ticket to PDP’s Light Up Night BLAST VIP Party – $400 ticket value
15% discount on tuition at Point Park University – for more information click here
15% discount on tuition at select programs at Duquesne University, including the PMBA program
Apply Now
For questions or more information reach out to Jack Dougherty , Senior Director of Constituent Services.
Member Login
Current members can access their member portal below. Here, you can stay on top of member benefits, update contact information, download invoices and make membership payments – all in one place.