Funding Opportunities and Fellowships
The Office of Graduate and Postdoctoral Affairs administers some of the financial support that is available to graduate students.
In addition, there are several fellowship and scholarship opportunities for prospective graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, some of which is outlined below. Prospective students should visit the Prospective Student Information page for more details on graduate tuition and fees. Students and postdocs should also consult their departments, advisors, and/or supervisors for information on possible additional opportunities.
Information regarding tuition and fees can be found on the Student Financial Services website .
Jump To:
Funding Support for Graduate Students
Graduate Student Conference Funding is provided by the Graduate Student Assembly and the Office of the Provost, and is managed by the Office of Graduate and Postdoctoral Affairs. The goal of the funding is to enable more CMU graduate students to make presentations at key conferences/exhibitions in their fields.
Professional Engagement Funding is provided by the Office of the Provost and is managed by the Office of Graduate and Postdoctoral Affairs. The goal of the funding is to offer graduate students some support for attending a conference or other professional engagement opportunity to network, perform, deepen knowledge, or compete within their field of study.
Scholarly Project Funding provide small grants of $750 to graduate students for forwarding their research at CMU. Grants are provided by the Graduate Student Assembly and the Provost's Office, and are managed by the Office of Graduate and Postdoctoral Affairs. Scholarly Project Funding is intended to be used against costs incurred in the completion of research required for a graduate degree at CMU.
Fellowship and Scholarship Opportunities
For Prospective Graduate Students
Rales Fellowship Program The CMU Rales Fellows Program is dedicated to cultivating the next generation of STEM leaders and drive innovation by increasing access to a life-changing graduate education.
For Prospective Postdocs
Carnegie Bosch Institute Fellowship Carnegie Bosch fellowships are two-year awards supporting outstanding postdoctoral researchers conducting high-potential research within the excellence-driven environment of CMU. Offering benefits beyond “traditional” postdoc roles, fellows are provided with the resources, flexibility, and environment to address “grand challenge” style problems in line with their research vision together with their faculty host.