Professional Development Programs
Expand your skills and elevate your career.
CMU offers a diverse range of learning resources to help you succeed. Choose from curated courses, interactive tools and structured programs designed to enhance your skills. Whether you prefer self-paced online modules or collaborative group learning, we have options to fit your style.
Our dedicated Learning and Development team is committed to your professional growth. In addition to providing a wealth of learning resources, they can develop customized training solutions and team-building activities to meet your specific needs.
Ready to learn more? Meet the L&D team and contact the team today!
Learning Programs and Resources
Nomination-based programs led by CMU's Office of Human Resources, our campus partners, and other local organizations. Topics include leadership, process improvement, design and administrative professional skills.
Register for the Staff Supervisory Awareness Program, find tips for managing in a hybrid workplace, access recruitment and search learning resources, and more.
Learning programs, videos, certificate opportunities, and other resources on a variety of high-demand skills. Topics include diversity, equity and inclusion; communications; computer skills; customer service, time management, and much more.
Use your CMU credentials to access resources from FocusU, LinkedIn Learning, Academic Impressions and DDI.
In-person and virtual team-building workshops, as well as online resources to help leaders develop their teams.
Staff members in participating areas are invited to apply in June of each year, and mentees are then matched with mentors based on experience, goals and interests. Staff members from other areas can complete an interest form to be considered for inclusion in the next round of the program.
Join a group of over 100 colleagues within the campus community who provide training and other learning opportunities.
Targeted learning resources that align with specific career paths.
Local and national groups to network with others in your field and enhance your professional profile.