Request a Carnegie Mellon Transcript
We have partnered with National Student Clearinghouse to provide 24/7 online transcript ordering services with confidential delivery. The document fee is $10 per transcript.
Delivery options are:
electronic delivery/PDF
print & mail - this option includes a shipping and handling fee of $2.85 per document plus a one-time delivery fee based on mailing service (USPS, express, etc.) and destination
Currently Enrolled Students
Currently enrolled students may log in through SIO and, under the Academic Info tab, request a transcript.
Alumni/Former Students
Alumni and/or former students may order transcripts directly through National Student Clearinghouse . If you attended CMU after 1990, please provide your Andrew ID  in the " Student ID" field.
Walk-In Services
The HUB student service center is located on the lower level (basement) of Warner Hall. Students and alumni are invited to visit us during the walk-in hours .
Submitting a Transcript for Transfer Credit
To be considered for transfer credit from another accredited institution, currently enrolled students must have their official transcripts sent to the University Registrar's office either electronically or through mail.  Unofficial transcripts, screenshots, or personal copies of transcripts are not accepted. We can only accept transcripts directly from students if the contents are in an official, sealed, and unopened envelope.
Transcripts should be submitted to one of the following addresses, depending on medium:
Electronic: cmuregistrar@andrew.cmu.edu
By mail: Carnegie Mellon University University Registrar's Office 5000 Forbes Ave,  Warner Hall A19 Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Upon receipt, the University Registrar's Office will verify the official transcript and send a copy of the transcript to the appropriate academic department responsible for the student's transfer credit decisions.  The official transcript will reside in the student's academic file.
Students interested in learning more about transferring credits from classes taken over the summer, while studying abroad, or during a leave of absence may visit the Transfer Credit webpage.
Students interested in taking courses for credit at one of the Pittsburgh Council on Higher Education (PCHE) affiliate schools may visit the Cross-Registration (PCHE) webpage.