Faculty Course Evaluations (FCEs)
Purpose
Faculty Course Evaluations (FCEs) are used to improve the quality of teaching and learning at Carnegie Mellon through feedback to both individual faculty members and promotion committees.
Responses to the FCE provide information on students' perceptions of their engagement, learning outcomes, the instructor's behavior and course activities. This feedback will help guide changes in future iterations of the course and/or the instructor's teaching.
Responses also serve as one measure of the quality of faculty member's teaching that is used to evaluate faculty for promotion and tenure.
Statement on Faculty Course Evaluation
Students play an integral role in the academic life of the university through their participation in the evaluation of the faculty through the Faculty Course Evaluation process.  FCE data serve an important role in the evaluation of teaching and learning, as an important piece of the promotion and tenure process, and as part of the process of course design and improvement. Student participation in the FCE process is critical to the university's commitment to quality teaching and academic excellence. Students are strongly encouraged to participate in the process with constructive feedback that is relevant to teaching and course content.
Privacy Statement
All of the survey data you provide is the property of Carnegie Mellon University.
Before filling out an evaluation, you will be asked to log in with your Andrew account. The system uses this information to provide you with the appropriate course evaluations, and any information obtained during this process will be used solely for that purpose.
Once you complete an evaluation, your Andrew ID and any other personally-identifying information are stripped from your evaluation. If you have started an evaluation, but not completed it, this information will be stripped from your evaluation at the end of the evaluation period.
Although data collected from your evaluation does not contain personally-identifying information, your written comments should not include clues to your identity where possible. However, course instructors DO NOT have access to the results of their evaluations until after final grades have been submitted for the course.
Gap Technologies and their software application, SmartEvals, have met specific privacy and security standards in compliance with the Carnegie Mellon Information Security Office and with Computing Services. The university takes your privacy seriously, and all reasonable precautions to protect it have been taken. Please direct any questions or concerns about this issue to uro-fce@andrew.cmu.edu .