Graduate Programs: MIIPS Master of Integrated Innovation for Products & Services
Are you ready to push the boundaries of what's possible?
The Master of Integrated Innovation for Products & Services (MIIPS) degree trains the next generation of innovators, disruptors, and world changers. In the MIIPS program, you'll learn to tackle industry and society’s greatest challenges in a world that increasingly merges technology with humanity. Innovation is driven by people, not products. Throughout the program, you'll work alongside the best and brightest engineers, business professionals, and designers seeking to break out of their discipline to work cross-functionally.
Choose the Program Format That's Right for You
With two formats of the MIIPS degree program, choose the option that works best for you based on your academic and professional goals.
* Eligible applicants can complete their scholarship application form on their application status page after submitting the MIIPS application for admission.
How to Apply for a MIIPS Scholarship
We understand that financing your education is a critical part of your decision. Please review the following information about requesting funding assistance:
Submitting Your Request : Eligible applicants can complete their Request for Funding Assistance Form on their application status page upon submitting the MIIPS application for admission.
What the Integrated Innovation Institute (iii) Admissions Committee is looking for: In 250 words or less, please let us know why you would like to be considered for funding. Share how funding will impact your ability to attend the MIIPS program. What specific goals do you hope to achieve and how do you envision using your education to make an impact on the world? Please be honest and detailed in your answers. We reserve the right to revoke an award if we determine that you have misrepresented your funding needs. Review and Decision: All funding decisions are made by the iii Admissions Committee . The iii will review your request and contact you when a decision has been reached. No Impact on Admissions: Your request to be considered for funding will in no way impact your admissions decision. Admissions decisions are made separately from funding decisions, and the information you provide on this form will only be used if you are admitted to a program. Updating Information: If your funding situation changes after submitting the form, please email admissions-iii@cmu.edu and our admissions team will work with you to update the information. Award Contingency: If awarded, funding is contingent on being in good academic standing. Non-Discrimination Policy: Carnegie Mellon University is committed to a policy of non-discrimination in the administration of its programs and activities. Questions? Please contact the iii Admissions Team at admissions-iii@cmu.edu if you have any questions or need other assistance
What the Integrated Innovation Institute (iii) Admissions Committee is looking for: In 250 words or less, please let us know why you would like to be considered for funding. Share how funding will impact your ability to attend the MIIPS program. What specific goals do you hope to achieve and how do you envision using your education to make an impact on the world? Please be honest and detailed in your answers. We reserve the right to revoke an award if we determine that you have misrepresented your funding needs.
In 250 words or less, please let us know why you would like to be considered for funding. Share how funding will impact your ability to attend the MIIPS program. What specific goals do you hope to achieve and how do you envision using your education to make an impact on the world?
Please be honest and detailed in your answers. We reserve the right to revoke an award if we determine that you have misrepresented your funding needs.
Review and Decision: All funding decisions are made by the iii Admissions Committee . The iii will review your request and contact you when a decision has been reached.
No Impact on Admissions: Your request to be considered for funding will in no way impact your admissions decision. Admissions decisions are made separately from funding decisions, and the information you provide on this form will only be used if you are admitted to a program.
Updating Information: If your funding situation changes after submitting the form, please email admissions-iii@cmu.edu and our admissions team will work with you to update the information.
Award Contingency: If awarded, funding is contingent on being in good academic standing.
Non-Discrimination Policy: Carnegie Mellon University is committed to a policy of non-discrimination in the administration of its programs and activities.
Questions? Please contact the iii Admissions Team at admissions-iii@cmu.edu if you have any questions or need other assistance
The Integrated Product Development Capstone: Designing the Future
Join a select, powerful network of innovators who have taken our pioneering capstone course: Integrated Product Development. Founded in 1986, the course originated from the writings of Nobel Laureate and Carnegie Mellon University professor Herb Simon and became the cornerstone of the MIIPS program in 2003. The course and MIIPS degree program have become a model for other universities. You'll work with industry sponsors on real-world problems, designing product and service solutions that impact real people.
Hear from MIIPS graduates and capstone sponsors on the capstone experience:
Virgil Looney (MIIPS '22) shares why the capstone course was crucial to his decision to enroll in the MIIPS program.
Trishala Pallai (MIIPS Advanced '22) reflects on her experience collaborating with Canon, her team's corporate sponsor for the capstone course.
VIDEO Corporate sponsors from Vapotherm, Honda, Canon, and Volvo share their experience working with iii students during the IPD Capstone.
Product Manager, Disney
Melody used her professional training in business and her passions in engineering and design through the MIIPS program to strengthen her skillset and launch her career.
Vice President of Service Design at JP Morgan Chase & Co
Originally in car design, Manchit realized he was interested in UX design and used MIIPS to help shape the future of his career.
Experience Design Principal, PNC Bank
With no experience in design but a passion for the discipline, Minette used the MPD program to add to her resume to help her pivot to new roles.
Senior Product Manager, MIM Software Inc.
Neha looked to MIIPS to enhance her skills. Originally, she was an engineer at MIM, and she was able to upgrade her skills through MIIPS. She then came back to the company years later as a product manager.