Curriculum Details
Across both courses in the Product Design Innovation certificate, students will learn design principles and techniques for product development that can be applied to tangible products, services, experiences, and related systems. The coursework challenges students to apply their learning in the context of research, sketching, model making, user testing, and presentation. Students will use traditional design skills as they visualize and represent design concepts and solutions. They'll consider holistic "product" offerings that span UI/UX, physical products, and human activity as they move through the coursework.
Course 1: 49-600, Introduction to Design Innovation
COURSE HIGHLIGHTS
Learn methods to understand a breadth of user needs
Gain skills in techniques and applications to create tangible products and product features
Hone skills needed to visualize and represent concepts efficiently
Generate a range of solutions via methods of early prototyping and testing
COURSE DESCRIPTION
This course is an introduction to design principles for product development and also instructs students in techniques and applications for tangible products. During the course, students will learn about the design process and the steps designers take from an understanding of user needs to the creation of a fully considered solution that meets those needs and delights the user. Building on the general principles introduced in the course, the course will give students the opportunity to apply their learning in the context of tangible products (research, sketching, model making, user testing and presentation). Students experience the use of traditional design skills (drawing, mockups and model making) in the visualization and representation of design concepts and solutions. This course not only introduces design innovation, but also provides training in a physical product context so that students can hone skills and techniques needed to visualize and represent product concepts efficiently and accurately.
The relationship among design, product development, and business is explored with class projects, readings, discussions, and the analysis of artifacts and process. Through case histories, lectures and a variety of hands-on exercises, students are exposed to design thinking and practice.
Course 2: 49-601, Innovation of Services & Experiences
Pre/Co-requisite: 49-600 - Introduction to Design Innovation
COURSE HIGHLIGHTS
Learn techniques to design services and experiences, easily distinguishing and shifting between different perspectives on the same design problem space
Leverage service and experience innovation frameworks to explain how an offering unfolds for people
Design holistic "product" offerings that span UI/UX, physical products, and human activity
Gain fluency to articulate offerings that are made up of systems of products, services and other components
COURSE DESCRIPTION
This course will define and study services, experiences, and related systems. Students will also learn the basics of designing services and experiences. Innovators who focus on these areas create new offerings for businesses with a primary focus on the quality of the human interactions and experiences that are often engrained in the heart of functional and/or tangible products. Essentially, this course will push students to consider holistic "product" offerings that span UI/UX, physical products, and human activity. In this course, students will first study the nature of services and experiences and then work in small project teams to analyze leading design solutions as well as to create new ones. Service and experience design frameworks will also be used both for the analysis of existing offerings as well as to propose innovative solutions.
The learning will take place via lectures, studio projects, and verbal and written exposition. Students will be working in familiar and unfamiliar forms including concepts for products, documents, events, spaces, activities, scripts, and software. Classwork will be done individually and in teams. By the end of this course, students should be able to do the following: Easily distinguish and shift between different perspectives on the same design problem space, leverage service, and experience innovation frameworks to explain how an offering unfolds for people, speak articulately about offerings that are made up of systems of products, services, and other components.