Table of Contents Ask the Chatbot
Deoxyribonucleic acid , better known as DNA, is crucial to life on Earth. The questions and answers in this list are taken from the Top Questions sections of the articles on DNA , recombinant DNA , and chloroplast , where you can find more questions answered.
What does DNA do?
DNA is an organic chemical that contains genetic information and instructions for protein synthesis . It is found in most cells of every organism. DNA is a key part of reproduction in which genetic heredity occurs through the passing down of DNA from parent or parents to offspring.
Can you edit DNA?
Gene editing today is mostly done through a technique called Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats ( CRISPR ), adopted from a bacterial mechanism that can cut out specific sections in DNA. One use of CRISPR is the creation of genetically modified organism crops.
What is recombinant DNA technology?
Recombinant DNA technology is the joining together of DNA molecules from two different species. The recombined DNA molecule is inserted into a host organism to produce new genetic combinations that are of value to science , medicine, agriculture, and industry. Since the focus of all genetics is the gene , the fundamental goal of laboratory geneticists is to isolate, characterize, and manipulate genes. Recombinant DNA technology is based primarily on two other technologies, cloning and DNA sequencing . Cloning is undertaken in order to obtain the clone of one particular gene or DNA sequence of interest. The next step after cloning is to find and isolate that clone among other members of the library (a large collection of clones). Once a segment of DNA has been cloned, its nucleotide sequence can be determined. Knowledge of the sequence of a DNA segment has many uses.
Do chloroplasts have DNA?
Unlike most other organelles , chloroplasts and mitochondria have small circular chromosomes known as extranuclear DNA. Chloroplast DNA contains genes that are involved with aspects of photosynthesis and other chloroplast activities. It is thought that both chloroplasts and mitochondria are descended from free-living cyanobacteria , which could explain why they possess DNA that is distinct from the rest of the cell.