Table of Contents Ask the Chatbot
What do you think of when you envision a trip to your local art museum? You might picture old paintings framed in ornate gold, Classical nude sculptures, and embellished porcelain enclosed in glass. It may feel as though the objects are trapped in time. But art is not just a thing of the past. It continues to this day. In fact, 21st-century artists such as these have been redefining traditional mediums to make dynamic , vital pieces.
Bisa Butler
Bisa Butler was born in 1973, and she gained recognition in the 21st century for her extraordinary quilted portraits of African Americans . Her life-sized works were often modeled from historical photographs that were labeled only with a demeaning term and the location. Butler selected, researched, and depicted those individuals in an effort to uncover their identities. She chose fabric and color to highlight certain characteristics. For figures with calmer expressions or dispositions , she used cool-toned fabric. For more animated characters, Butler used warmer colors. Both her cool and warm hues, called Kool-Aid colors for their vibrancy, reflect the palette of the AfriCOBRA collective , a 1960s Black art movement formed in Chicago, which she learned about while attending Howard University . Butler sourced fabrics from all over the world, especially from parts of Africa, where some fabrics have symbolic meanings. For example, the “Speed Bird fabric” is a popular African textile printed with birds in flight “symboliz[ing] wealth, prosperity, and movement.” Butler used it for her portrait of Emmett J. Scott (2020), personal secretary of African American educator and reformer Booker T. Washington . By combining the individual messages of fabrics with larger African American themes, Butler displayed the inherent dignity and broader sense of heritage of her subjects. Moreover, by depicting forward-facing and life-sized figures, she would “level the playing field between subject and viewer, past and present, black and white, living and deceased” and create mutual observation and communication . She finished her pieces by giving them new titles, including Africa The Land of Hope and Promise for Negro People’s of the World , the title for her portrait of Scott.
Tetsuya Noda
Born in Kumamoto prefecture, Japan, in 1940, Tetsuya Noda was a printmaker who worked in the 20th and 21st centuries. He is best known for his Diary series, which combines traditional Japanese woodblock with newer printing methods to create pieces with a hazy photographic quality. The series, beginning in the 1970s, illuminates daily snapshots of intimately domestic and often humorous subjects. The print Diary: July 11th ’97 depicts his wife and grown daughter positioned side by side, their bodies angled toward each other as they look at the camera. The initial photograph was taken at the daughter’s request to compare the sizes of the women’s noses. Such personal moments are rare in traditional Japanese art , and, when Noda first began his work, he was criticized. He joked that such practices later became acceptable when everyone shared their private lives on such social media sites as Facebook . To make his art, Noda began by enlarging one of his photographs, which he then altered with graphite, watercolor, and whiteout. He called this process “cooking”: “I season [the image] and add my own particular flavor.” Next, Noda created a dotted stencil of the modified photograph by running it through a Mimeograph , a common type of duplicating machine used in offices in the 20th century. He then silk-screened the stencil onto a sheet of paper, which he had separately prepared with accents and washes of color using traditional Japanese woodblock techniques. Finally, Noda signed the completed pieces with “Diary,” the date, and his thumbprint in red ink, a reference to the Japanese red stamps that traditionally accompany woodblock pieces.
Sean Scully
Born in Dublin in 1945, Sean Scully, a 20th- and 21st-century painter, grew up in postwar London. In 1975 he moved to the United States , where he made his best-known paintings of lines, stripes, and overlapping blocks of color. While these seemingly objective works share qualities with Minimalism —the dominant movement during Scully’s artistic training in the 1960s—they are surprisingly expressive. Whereas Minimalism is characterized by its simple, often geometric forms and objective approach, Scully’s work is made up of untidy lines, gestural brushstrokes, and overlapping colors, which invoke an emotional response. The works recall German Expressionists Ernst Ludwig Kirchner and Karl Schmidt-Rottluff , who both favored simplified shapes, bold colors, emotional impressions, and thick brushstrokes. Moreover, Scully’s paintings are informed by his experiences, including his impoverished childhood, the death of his first son in a car crash, and a trip to Morocco. There Scully was inspired by the use of stripes and patterns, rather than the figuration favored by Western art, to convey feeling. Afterward he incorporated the vocabulary into his work. His choice of color also had personal significance. The dark reds in his palette resemble the reds of the upholstery in the pub where his grandmother used to sing. He explained that he used these shades and not the bright reds found “in American advertising” because those hues “don’t mean anything to me.”
Mira Nakashima
Mira Nakashima, born in 1942, was the daughter of George Nakashima, who founded George Nakashima Woodworkers in New Hope , Pennsylvania, after World War II . Mira later became a woodworker and furniture maker in her own right, and she continued to operate the company after her father’s death in 1990. She was known for maintaining George’s multicultural philosophy and practices while also creating her own designs. George’s work combined elements of traditional Japanese design with Modernism , Prairie style , and Shaker designs. It emphasized the natural grain of the trees and revolutionized the use of naturally knotted wood that had previously been seen as flawed. By making trees into furniture, George provided them with a “second life.” Mira continued to encapsulate this spirit in her work by drawing the grain of wooden slabs before cutting them in order to determine the best way to highlight their natural shapes. She also shared her father’s passion for craftsmanship, as demonstrated by her continued use of the “butterfly” joints he made popular. George often applied these joints to connect split wood, particularly on tabletops, and Mira used the technique for a similar purpose in types of furniture George rarely produced—namely, statement sofas. In one version of her Tsuitate sofa , a dramatic wood back is bridged with pronounced butterfly joints.
Richard Hunt
Born in 1935 on the South Side of Chicago, Richard Hunt was a sculptor best known for his abstract metal pieces. Hunt often used traditional and newer methods to create “movement”-filled and evocative sculptures. He once said that “in some works, it is my intention to develop the kind of forms Nature might create if only heat and steel were available to her.” In order to achieve this organic effect, Hunt turned to welding, which gained popularity in sculpture in the 20th century during the start of his career. For many of his larger later pieces, including We Will (2005), Hunt worked as though creating a three-dimensional collage, intuitively welding together cut and shaped sheets of metal, usually stainless steel . He “exploit[ed] the tensile strength” of the material to “have things move out in space.” Many of his smaller works, which share the same dynamism but feel more fluid, use the traditional method of bronze casting. This process involves modeling the sculpture first in clay or wax , making a mold of the sculpture, and filling the mold with molten bronze. Once the bronze is cooled and hardened, it is removed from the mold and typically finished by buffing and polishing.
Linda Lighton
American artist Linda Lighton, born in 1948, was known for using ceramics to humorously illustrate societal issues through the lens of female experience. One of her series, Taking Aim , grapples with such varied themes as women’s roles, sensuality, sexuality, capitalism, and violence. Many of the pieces in the collection contain lipsticks of differing sizes and bright shades, some made to resemble bullet casings and placed in bullet belts. Lighton consequently seems to suggest that violence is just as seductive as lipstick. The phallic appearance of lipstick is also significant. Although women can use lipstick as a tool for seduction, they in turn can be seduced by its shape and implicit promise of sex. The phallus, while pleasurable to some women, is a symbol of manhood and testosterone, which can fuel violence against them. Lipstick depicted as a bullet thus conveys an ironic twist of power. What women are attracted to and consider a tool for expression, confidence, and command is also a weapon leveraged against them. Other aspects of the collection display similar seductive renderings of violence. In Hit Me (2012), gasoline pumps are interspersed with guns and arranged like a mandala against what appears to be a roulette wheel to create a hypnotic circle. That piece reflects what Lighton perceived to be America’s fascination with firearms and oil. In another work, guns bloom from flowers. “In the United States,” the artist wrote, “guns seem to be flowering like weeds, with a reverence for brute force and a resistance to humanity.” The coy storytelling and poignant atmosphere of Lighton’s pieces are also conveyed through her medium. Ceramics are often considered a useful or domestic craft and inferior to the fine arts. Lighton’s application of the medium in a sculptural setting thus advances an expression of female pursuits. The painstakingly applied layers of glaze that color Lighton’s complicated shapes further the sense of artistry in the pieces, stimulating seemingly absent senses, such as the taste of metal and the smell of leather, to intensify the atmosphere of her work.