Table of Contents Ask the Chatbot
Since 1665, when English physicist Robert Hooke coined the term cell to describe the microscopic view of cork, scientists have been developing increasingly sophisticated microscopy tools, enabling them to view ever-smaller details of cellular structure. Far from the poor-quality microscopes that limited cell study in the 17th and 18th centuries, today’s instruments and techniques allow for high magnification and very fine resolution—in some instances, enabling the visualization of details at resolutions of 10 nm or less (1 nm = 10 −9 meter). Contemporary techniques also allow researchers to identify specific molecules on or in cells and can allow molecules to be tracked over time in living cells and whole organisms such as mice. The following list highlights 10 exciting and cutting-edge microscopy approaches to cellular and molecular visualization.
Near-field scanning optical microscopy
Near-field scanning optical microscopy (NSOM) allows for the visualization of nanoscale features in a specimen by surpassing the diffraction limit, which in conventional light microscopy prevents the resolution of structures that lie close together (generally, less than half the wavelength of the light used to image them, or about 200 nm for the shortest wavelengths of visible light). In NSOM, to resolve features below the diffraction limit, light waves are emitted very near to the specimen’s surface (hence the term near-field ). Although limited to the study of specimen (e.g., cell) surfaces, NSOM can achieve lateral resolutions of about 20 nm and axial (vertical) resolutions in the range of 2 to 5 nm. Because it resolves features below the diffraction limit, it is considered a type of superresolution microscopy.
Atomic-force microscopy
Atomic-force microscopy (AFM) allows for very high surface resolution of samples, providing researchers with information about surface features. AFM works by dragging a sharp tip (only a few atoms wide) over the sample surface and measuring the force between the tip and the sample surface. The resulting signal can be translated into a description of the surface topography , and the surface-force scan can be converted to produce a three-dimensional image of the sample surface. In the biological sciences, AFM has been used to investigate cell behavior and cell-cell interactions, as well as to evaluate certain cell-surface characteristics.
Laser-scanning confocal microscopy
Laser-scanning confocal microscopy allows for deep imaging of biological specimens and eliminates or reduces information from areas beyond the focal plane, resulting in the production of sharply defined images. The development of the first laser scanning confocal microscope in the late 1960s and early 1970s marked a major advance in microscopy. The continued development of laser technology, detectors and filters, and fluorescent chemicals that attach to highly specific targets in cells and tissues has made confocal microscopy a key tool in biological research.
Structured-illumination microscopy
Structured-illumination microscopy (SIM), another superresolution technique, was developed as a means of improving the illumination and imaging capabilities of wide-field microscopes (microscopes with relatively large fields of view). This is accomplished by using Fourier transforms to reconstruct and digitally filter spatially incoherent fluorescent emissions detected from a sample. Fourier transformation produces images of samples at resolutions that surpass the diffraction limit.
Selective plane illumination microscopy/light-sheet fluorescence microscopy
In selective plane illumination microscopy (SPIM)/light-sheet fluorescence microscopy (LSFM), only the focused plane of a sample is illuminated , allowing for the optical sectioning of specimens in the axial (vertical) direction. Combined with fluorescence microscopy techniques, SPIM/LSFM enables researchers to visualize specimens in real-time and at high resolution and sample depth without causing photodamage. SPIM/LSFM frequently is used for time-lapse imaging of live cells and whole-tissue specimens, such as embryos.
Serial time-encoded amplified microscopy
Serial time-encoded amplified microscopy (STEAM) is a high-speed imaging technology that employs a phenomenon known as photonic time stretch, in which light signals reflected from a sample to the microscope are slowed down by spatial dispersion. A photodetector receives the amplified time-stretched signals, which are subsequently processed digitally to reconstruct a real-time image. This technique is especially useful in the biomedical sciences for the visualization of dynamic processes (e.g., chemical signaling) in live cells.
Stimulated emission depletion microscopy
In stimulated emission depletion (STED) microscopy, samples are treated with fluorescent dyes, which are then selectively depleted by the optical system. The system uses two laser beams, the first of which excites the fluorophores and the second of which immediately returns them to the ground state. The second beam, however, is modified to exhibit zero intensity at the center of focus. Hence, when the two beams are superimposed, the area of illumination is minimized, leaving only a small region of fluorescence where focal power is concentrated. STED is considered a type of superresolution microscopy, enabling details of proteins and other molecules to be resolved down to the single nanometer range.
Differential interference contrast microscopy
Differential interference contrast (DIC) microscopy is used to image unstained transparent specimens, with contrast in specimen components generated from differences in index of refraction . Although similar to phase-contrast microscopy (in which changes in brightness in an image correspond to phase shifts in light as light passes through a transparent specimen), DIC has superior resolution capabilities. It is commonly used for viewing cultured cells, blood smears, and single-celled organisms, such as bacteria and diatoms.
Expansion microscopy
Expansion microscopy is an emerging technique that relies on the manipulation of specimens, rather than on the modification of microscope or imaging components, to achieve spatial resolution at nanometer scales. In this approach, fixed cells and tissues are treated with a polymer gel, which is then chemically induced to swell, expanding by nearly two orders of magnitude. The expansion separates and thereby allows for the optical resolution of features that are otherwise below the diffraction limit (too near to one another to resolve). Using this superresolution technique, researchers are able to view features in the sub-100-nm range.
Transmission electron microscopy
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is among the most-powerful microscopy techniques developed, enabling the visualization of features at resolutions on the order of single nanometers. In TEM, a beam of electrons is focused onto a specimen. The electrons pass through the specimen, forming a highly magnified electron image, which is then made visible to the human eye either by capturing the electrons on a fluorescent screen or by capturing them digitally. In biological applications, TEM has been used to image a wide variety of specimens, from cells and virus particles to individual proteins and other molecules.