Table of Contents Ask the Chatbot
Dredged out of the past and hinting at violent mysteries, bog bodies intrigue and haunt us. The how of their existence is known: bogs (cold-weather swamps) are excellent preservers of human bodies. The oxygen-free environment prevents decay, and the excessive tannins —naturally occurring chemicals used in tanning leather—preserve organic materials such as bodies, including the soft tissues and the contents of the digestive tract . (Bones, however, are a different matter.) But why were they there, and why did so many die violently?
Yde Girl
Year found: 1897
Age at death: about 16
Dated to: between 170 BCE and 230 CE
Where found: near the village of Yde, Drenthe, the Netherlands
Manner of death: Strangulation. A woolen band remains around her throat. She was also stabbed with a knife near her left clavicle.
Noteworthy: A CAT scan revealed that she suffered from scoliosis and probably had an irregular gait . She was buried in a large woolen cloak.
Weerdinge “Couple” or Weerdinge Men
Year found: 1904
Age at death: unknown
Dated to: 160 BCE to 220 CE
Where found: Bourtanger Moor in the Netherlands
Manner of death: The larger figure (male), whose arm lies under the body of a slighter figure, was stabbed on the left side of his chest, and his intestines were protruding from the wound. Experts do not know how the other man died.
Noteworthy: The seemingly tender position of the figures led observers to believe that the two were actually a male and female couple, nicknamed “Mr. and Mrs. Veenstra” ( veen is Dutch for “ peat ”). Experts have since determined that the second, less well-preserved figure is also a man. What’s the back story here? Had they been punished for being gay?
Elling Woman
Year found: 1938
Age at death: about 25
Dated to: about 280 BCE—early Iron Age
Where found: Bjældskovdal bog, near Silkeborg, Denmark
Manner of death: Hanging. A rope made of skin was found with the body, and there was “ a clearly visible furrow around the neck .”
Noteworthy: Her finely braided pigtail and her cloak , sewn with fine thread. A piece of cloak was wrapped around her feet. Although she was found 12 years earlier, her body was located some 200 feet away from the Tolland Man.
Koelbjerg Man
Year found: 1941
Age at death: 25 or younger
Dated to: 8000 BCE
Where found: near Odense, Denmark
Manner of death: unknown, perhaps drowning
Noteworthy: The oldest of the bog bodies. Only a skull and several bones were found, but no signs of violence were present. He was thought to be a woman until 2016, when DNA analysis proved otherwise.
Tollund Man
Year found: 1950
Age at death: about 30–40
Dated to: about 280 BCE—early Iron Age
Where found: Bjældskovdal bog (Denmark), relatively near the bog body known as Elling Woman
Manner of death: hanging, but death caused by suffocation only, not by the combination of suffocation and broken neck
Noteworthy: He has the most well-preserved body of all bog bodies to date. Only his arms and hands are like those of a skeleton. Either his clothing disintegrated or he was buried wearing only a pointed cap made of sheepskin and an oxhide belt.
Grauballe Man
Year found: 1952
Age at death: mid-30s
Dated to: early Iron Age
Where found: Nebel Mose bog, close to Silkeborg
Manner of death: throat slit from ear to ear
Noteworthy: His hands and feet are very well-preserved, as is his face. He remains one of the most examined bog bodies and is believed to have been sacrificed to a fertility goddess after a bad harvest. Seamus Heaney wrote a poem about him, “ The Grauballe Man .”
Lindow Man
Year found: 1984
Age at death: about 25 years
Dated to: radiocarbon dated to 2 BCE–119 CE
Where found: Lindow Moss in northwest England
Manner of death: struck twice on the head, garroted, and had his jugular vein severed
Noteworthy: He was given the name “Pete Marsh” by the radiologist who X-rayed the body—after she suggested that an X-ray (which would reveal the presence of fillings in the teeth) could determine whether or not the body was modern. Lindow Man wore a fox-fur band on his left arm but was otherwise naked. He was also well groomed—hair and beard trimmed by shears and fingernails filed. (For further reading, see Lindow Man by Jody Joy .)
Old Croghan Man (partial figure)
Year found: 2003
Age at death: early 20s
Dated to: 362–175 BCE
Where found: County Offaly, Ireland
Manner of death: strangulation, stabbing, and had holes cut in his arms through which wreaths of twisted hazel (withies) were threaded
Noteworthy: Decapitated upper torso only. His fingernails seem to have been manicured. He wore a leather armband and a bronze amulet. One scholar noted that both Old Croghan Man and Clonycavan Man had had their nipples cut off and that “sucking a king’s nipples was a gesture of submission in ancient Ireland.” The brutal removal of their nipples, therefore, may be an indication that the two were either failed kings or failed candidates for kingship.
Clonycavan Man (partial figure)
Year found: 2003
Age at death: early 20s
Dated to: 392–201 BCE
Where found: Clonycavan, County Meath, Ireland
Manner of death: He was strangled, stabbed, struck on the head three times and on the chest once with an axe, and disemboweled
Noteworthy: The legs and lower arms are missing. It’s thought that he used “product” (made of plant oil and pine resin—ingredients that were imported from the Continent) on his hair. Both Clonycavan Man and Old Croghan Man are believed to have been “triple-killed” as a sacrifice to the goddess in her three forms—fertility, sovereignty , and war/death.