Space-age solutions transform life on Earth
Astronomy and space exploration drive innovation. NASA research has contributed to advancements in water filtration, coatings for space helmet visors are now used to create scratch-resistant lenses for sunglasses, shock absorbent padding for spacesuits is now widely used in mattresses and pillows, and the need for lightweight, portable tools in space led to the development of cordless power tools.
"When we're doing this work, we're driving innovation in ways that will spread way beyond studies of cosmology and astronomy and benefit society," Mandelbaum said.
The United States has a long history of fundamental research leading to practical applications decades later. Quantum mechanics is one example. A part of theoretical physics research that began in the early 1900s, its applications can be seen decades later in computers, medical imaging and global positioning systems.
"A large portion of the U.S. GDP is related to devices that wouldn't exist if we didn't know about quantum mechanics," she said. "Understanding fundamental physics has long-term societal benefits that are difficult to predict at the time you're doing the research."
Mandelbaum said that telescopes like Rubin help advancements in areas such as imaging, optics, sensors and materials for use in defense, aviation and manufacturing.
The big data tools that the LINCC Frameworks team is developing have applications in areas such as artificial intelligence, finance and logistics.
Another outcome of studying space — A talent pool of professionals skilled in software development, quantitative analysis and problem-solving.
For example, Chanhyuk (Andy) Park is working at Argonne National Laboratory on resolving tricky challenges that arise during long-term cosmology surveys. Because of his expertise learned at Carnegie Mellon as a doctoral candidate in physics, he earned a fellowship from the Department of Energy through the Office of Science Graduate Student Research Program (SCGSR).
Park focuses on enhancing gravitational lensing to make current approaches more accurate. His work takes raw telescope data and uses computational methods to provide more detailed images of what galaxies look like and how large they are. At Argonne since January 2025, he has been helping researchers develop methods to analyze the Rubin data.
Mandelbaum said not all of the students and postdoctoral fellows trained at Carnegie Mellon's McWilliams Center spend their careers in cosmology and astrophysics.
"A lot of them will go out into the world and join the workforce as well-trained and well-educated people who help support science, technology, engineering and math that move the country forward," Mandelbaum said.