Two ways to earn a higher interest rate on your savings.
© MStudioImages—Image Source/Getty Images
The record-low interest rates common in the 2010s may have made you hesitant to put your money into a money market account or especially a certificate of deposit (CD). But since the Federal Reserve has hiked interest rates, the yields offered on these accounts have risen significantly. That’s prompted savers to once again consider these traditional savings accounts—and perhaps you’re among them.
Money market accounts and CDs both earn interest on cash deposits. Both are also insured by the federal government , which means the chances of losing your money are very low. But money market accounts and CDs serve different purposes. Depending on your savings goals , one may be a smarter choice than the other.
Key Points
Money market accounts are high-interest savings accounts, while CDs are deposit accounts that pay a fixed interest rate over a specified term.
Money market accounts and CDs are both federally insured up to $250,000 per depositor.
Money market accounts let you access your cash at any time, while CDs penalize early withdrawals from the account.
Money market account vs. certificates of deposit (CDs)
Money market accounts and certificates of deposit (CDs) offer a safe way to earn higher interest rates than a standard savings account. Both accounts are insured—by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) at banks, or National Credit Union Administration (NCUA) at credit unions —for up to $250,000 per depositor, providing account holders peace of mind that their funds are protected.
Money market accounts let you deposit money and access it at any time. You can even write checks from the account or withdraw cash with an ATM card . In contrast, CDs are fixed-term accounts that lock up your funds for a while in exchange for a better interest rate. CDs make it harder to access your money than a money market account, although you might earn a better rate.
Here’s more detail on how money market accounts and CDs compare:
Money market account
Certificate of deposit (CD)
Deposit account
Deposit account
Deposit insurance is provided by FDIC or NCUA up to $250,000 per depositor
Deposit insurance is provided by FDIC or NCUA up to $250,000 per depositor
Interest is paid based on the account interest rate and balance
A fixed interest rate is based on the deposit term
Available at most banks and credit unions
Available at most banks, credit unions, and investment brokers
Many accounts charge no monthly maintenance fees
Most accounts come with a withdrawal penalty
Access funds anytime
Funds are locked up for the duration of the CD term, with penalties for early withdrawal
What is a money market account?
A money market account is a bank account that offers higher interest rates on deposits. You can open a money market account through most banks or credit unions , and many charge no monthly maintenance fees.
Money market accounts typically offer check-writing privileges and may come with an ATM card that allows you to withdraw cash, check account balances, and make deposits.
Some money market accounts impose restrictions on the number of transfers or withdrawals you can make each month, imposing a fee for exceeding the account limits. These limits are based on a previous federal regulation. Although the regulation was amended in 2020 to remove transaction limits, some banks still charge fees above a set maximum.
Money market accounts may come with a high minimum deposit requirement to open an account and/or high minimum balance requirements to earn the best interest rate.
Money market account vs. money market fund: What’s the difference?
What is a certificate of deposit (CD)?
A certificate of deposit (CD) is a timed deposit account that pays a better interest rate for locking up your money for a set time. Most banks and credit unions offer CDs, with terms typically ranging from three months to five years or more.
CDs allow you to deposit a set amount and earn interest on the funds until the maturity date (when your money becomes accessible without penalty). In most cases, the longer the term you choose, the better the interest rate (but not always).
Although funds are locked into a CD until maturity, it’s still possible to access your money—you’ll just pay for the privilege. Most CDs impose an early withdrawal penalty for accessing funds before the maturity date. The penalty could be several months of earned interest or more.
There are no-penalty CDs that charge no fee for accessing your money before the term ends, but they typically feature lower rates than standard CDs.
When should you choose a money market account?
Money market accounts are ideal for depositing money when you want to earn a better interest rate—but also have easy access. If you’re saving for a home or other large purchase, or simply want to stash cash for your emergency fund , a money market account offers a safe and secure way to earn interest on that money.
When should you choose a certificate of deposit (CD)?
Instead of depositing and withdrawing money whenever you wish, a CD is a “timed” account.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
CDs are less accessible, but they’re just as safe and may pay higher rates than standard savings accounts. CDs make sense if you don’t mind locking your money away for a set term. Most come with a penalty for withdrawing your money before the term ends, but that fee can also be a form of self-discipline to help you save. Don’t want to pay a penalty? Leave the account alone until it matures.
The bottom line
CDs and money market accounts both offer higher-than-average interest rates, federal deposit insurance up to $250,000, and protection from stock market volatility. Your choice of one over the other depends on your savings goals .
If you want your money to earn the highest rate available, a long-term CD (perhaps even three years or longer) may make the most sense. If ease of access is key, a money market account may be the more sensible choice. Just keep in mind that the interest rate on money market accounts (and savings accounts, generally) tends to move with any change to the Fed’s benchmark federal funds rate . So your savings could earn less if the Fed should lower rates.