Memory care services, costs, and how to choose the right facility.
© Cecilie Skjold Wackerhausen/stock.adobe.com
One of the most devastating parts of a dementia diagnosis is realizing someone with the disease will slowly, inexorably lose the qualities that once defined them. This inevitability adds complexity to caregiving choices for families who often understandably wish to keep a loved one at home or have family members provide care.
The reality is that neither choice may be possible as the disease progresses. Considering your options sooner rather than later can give you greater control in a situation that can seem uncontrollable. One such option is memory care, which is tailored to patients with dementia and differs from assisted living and nursing homes .
What is dementia?
Dementia is an umbrella term for a series of cognitive disorders that are degenerative and irreversible; that is, the progression of the disease can be slowed with treatment, but no cure exists. Alzheimer’s disease is the most well-known of these conditions, but others include Lewy body dementia and vascular dementia.
In the early stages of dementia, patients may be able to stay at home, whether that’s with family members or in a senior community . But as the disease progresses, it may be best—not just for caregivers, but also for the patient—to find a facility that understands the scope of the disease and how to keep patients safe and comfortable.
What is memory care, and how is it different from assisted living?
Both assisted living and memory care have staff-to-resident ratios that allow for greater levels of care. Assisted living is just that; the staff is there to help residents navigate mobility issues or other daily tasks, but there are some tasks they can (and want to) do on their own. Residents are largely free to come and go within the facility as they choose.
When you reach the point of considering memory care for your loved one, they likely already need more help with daily tasks such as taking medication, eating meals, dressing, and bathing. Another challenge is wandering, which affects about 60% of those with dementia, according to the Alzheimer’s Association.
For this reason, many memory care facilities are secured, with measures in place to prevent residents from leaving the unit or building. It’s important not to think of this as your loved one being “locked in” or imprisoned. For someone with dementia, wandering off can be disorienting and frightening—and it also carries serious physical risks. As an alternative to locking down a ward or hallway, some facilities outfit residents with bracelets so that staff can monitor their locations.
The types of activities offered in memory care also differ from assisted living. Quality facilities encourage residents to participate in activities where they can feel engaged without being overwhelmed. These offerings may include music, art, or activities with family, but are likely to be low-key, with minimal visual or audio stimulation that might be unsettling.
Signs that it’s time for memory care
Although occasional forgetfulness is a normal part of aging, certain patterns of decline can signal that memory care may be needed. Common warning signs include:
Finances: Trouble paying bills , balancing a checkbook , or having utilities cut off due to missed payments.
Personal care: Difficulty consistently taking medications, bathing, dressing, or eating meals.
Safety: Prone to wandering, leaving water running, or forgetting to turn off the stove.
Withdrawal or aggression: Loss of interest in once-enjoyable activities, or lashing out due to frustration and awareness of limitations.
Power of attorney and dementia care
Money troubles are often one of the first noticeable signs of dementia, whether it’s unpaid bills, bounced checks , or utilities being shut off. Once a diagnosis is made, it’s wise to begin a conversation about whether a trusted person should take over these responsibilities.
At that stage, families should also consider establishing a power of attorney . Because dementia is progressive, completing the legal paperwork early allows the affected individual to participate in choosing who will make decisions on their behalf. Power of attorney documents can cover finances, medical decisions , or both, and requirements vary by state. Consulting an elder law attorney can help ensure the forms are filed correctly and that caregivers fully understand what each document allows.
What to look for in a memory care facility
When visiting memory care facilities—ideally more than once—consider these factors before choosing one:
Staffing levels. Ask about staff-to-resident ratios—both during the day and overnight, when residents may be more prone to agitation.
Staff interactions. Note whether staff members call residents by name, use soothing tones, and can calmly redirect frustration.
Training and medical support. Find out what training staff receive and whether nurses and doctors are available around the clock.
Environment. Look for a clean, welcoming space. Clear signage with words and pictures helps residents navigate. Outdoor areas for walking or gardening are a plus.
Meals and family involvement. Ask whether families can join residents for meals and whether meals are served in communal dining rooms, individual rooms, or both.
Activities. Review the activity schedule. Ideally, activities are engaging but not overstimulating and are offered at times when residents are most alert.
Resident well-being. Check if residents appear engaged and cared for, and whether you feel confident in the staff’s ability to support your loved one. Trust your instincts.
Costs of memory care
How much memory care costs depends on the level of care, geographic location, and other factors. But simply put, it is not cheap. The annual cost of memory care services in 2024 was just under $95,000, according to a National Investment Center study on senior housing and care.
Medicare (the health insurance available to those 65 and older and those with disabilities) offers only limited coverage for dementia care, leaving families to look elsewhere for help with most of that $95,000. There are, however, other options to consider:
Medicaid . The government health plan for low-income individuals may cover some costs if your loved one qualifies. Because eligibility and benefits vary by state, reviewing the rules that apply where care will be provided is key.
Long-term care insurance. If your loved one has a long-term care policy, it may cover the ongoing costs of memory care after a waiting period outlined in the policy. As always, read the fine print.
Reverse mortgage . This type of loan enables homeowners to tap into the equity in their homes to cover the costs of care. But rules require the borrower to maintain the home as their primary residence, which can complicate matters should the patient ultimately need full-time care in a facility.
Veterans benefits. Those who have served in the military may qualify for benefits through the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs , which can help offset the cost of memory care.
Savings . The cost of memory care can, of course, be financed with savings , retirement accounts , pensions , Social Security benefits , or even loans from family. When calculating how long these funds will last, take into account that the cost of care typically increases each year, at least in line with inflation .
The bottom line
Deciding on memory care for someone you love can be complicated by family relationships, feelings of guilt and responsibility, and financial factors. When dealing with a dementia diagnosis, there are no perfect answers. Know that you are trying to make the best decisions for your loved one—and for yourself—given the situation.
Remind your loved one that you will never stop loving them or caring for them, even if you are entrusting some of that care to others. Give yourself permission to grieve, but understand that having a plan, exercising some control over a difficult situation, and knowing that adjustments will be necessary is the best way to navigate the “long goodbye.”