In today's complex financial world, there's plenty of information available—so much sometimes that it feels impossible to figure out what's relevant to you and whether you can even trust it.
That's why we created Britannica Money —to help everyday investors and savers like yourself navigate the financial journey through every stage, from opening your first bank account to leaving a legacy for the grandkids.
We've assembled a team of seasoned experts from all corners of the financial world, including accredited money managers, professional traders, accountants, market analysts, retirement specialists, and financial journalists. They're contributing their best insights, tools, and tips to Encyclopædia Britannica's 250+ years as the worldwide authority in education, knowledge, and information.
Here's a sampling:
Retirement . Are you confused by all the different retirement terms—Roth and traditional IRAs, 401(k) plans, and more? How does Social Security work? What's an annuity, and should you invest in one? Are you on track toward your retirement goals, and how can you know? We've got you covered.
Investing . You have some investable assets, but where should you put them? Stocks? Bonds? Mutual funds or exchange-traded funds (ETFs)? Under the mattress? And where does crypto fit into a portfolio, if at all? We explain the myriad of investment types, terminology, strategies, and market psychology, sharing the tools you need to keep your investing on track and aligned with your goals, values, and risk tolerance.
Household Finance . Dealing with money often means focusing on topics that are closer to home. Things like budgeting and saving. Credit scores and debt management. Insurance. Should you buy a house, and how do you go about it? What are the best ways to pay off debt? We've got a full suite of no-nonsense wisdom from our team of personal finance professionals.
And that's just the beginning. We'll add new articles, insights, and thought leadership every day, so stay tuned.
Factual. Insightful. Actionable. Britannica Money