Only the beginning
Iris returned to Earth’s atmosphere above the remote South Pacific Ocean on Jan. 18, and disintegrated upon reentry. While Iris’ journey didn’t go as planned, the students succeeded in building a piece of space-faring technology that has made it farther from Earth and closer to the moon than any student-built rover has to date.
“Ultimately it comes down to having a team that works well together, is confident and throws ideas out, however crazy they might be,” Talento said. “Speak your mind, and someone will take it, someone will run with it, and together we’ll figure it out.”
There are currently no plans for an “Iris 2.” However, the technology and action behind Iris lays substantial groundwork for future space, robotics and engineering endeavors at Carnegie Mellon. Raewyn Duvall (opens in new window) , the Iris program manager and a rover executive director, noted that the team’s work has already made a substantial impact on space and robotics work at CMU.
“A lot of lessons learned have already gone into projects like MoonRanger (opens in new window) ,” said Duvall, who was previously at NASA. In one instance, before delivering Iris to Astrobotic, an opening needed to be made on the rover to access difficult-to-reach internal electronics so that software updates could be made after delivery. This inspired an approach to incorporate more direct access points into the designs of future projects. “The question of, ‘How do you future proof?’ is something most students don’t think of. Building it into the procedures future projects will use is a really big thing.”
But perhaps more importantly, Iris and its student team have established a legacy of teamwork and inclusion. “One of the goals of Iris at a fundamental and broad level is to open up space to more people,” Talento said. “If we’ve learned anything from this, it’s that that’s a good idea and needs to happen sooner rather than later.”
International contributions to the project meant that the team was able to bring in perspectives that seldom make their way into other institutions in the industry. “We were fully a university project, so were able to work with international students who would not otherwise be able to due to proprietary issues,” Duvall said.
Additionally, the Iris team comprises individuals from a wide range of academic backgrounds, ethnicities, cultures, sexual orientations and gender identities to form a welcoming environment. “They have become such a family,” Duvall said.
“Especially after being stuck in a house together,” Talento added. “We have the annoying younger brother trope, the strange cousin … ”
“ … the separated dad who comes back for all of the cool events,” Duvall added jokingly. “There are all of those roles.”
The experience allowed the current students, many of whom are members of Gen Z, to form relationships that will likely last a lifetime while setting records and achieving scientific marvels.
"Iris' legacy is to open up space to students, to young people, to enthusiasts, to dreamers," Talento said.