Reaffirming its commitment to lowering barriers to domestic graduate education in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) fields, Carnegie Mellon University inducted its second cohort of CMU Rales Fellows (opens in new window) Tuesday, Sept. 30.
The 34 CMU Rales Fellows in the 2025 cohort (opens in new window) are exceptional scholars, creative innovators and purpose-driven leaders committed to making a meaningful impact in their fields and communities.
“We are delighted to partner with a distinguished institution like Carnegie Mellon to open up access to a world-class graduate education for talented and deserving students like these 34 Fellows,” said Joshua Rales, president of the Norman R. Rales and Ruth Rales Foundation. “We can think of no better way to honor the memory of my parents, Norman and Ruth Rales, than by empowering these outstanding young people to realize their full potential as future leaders and innovators in the sciences.”
Established in 2023 through a transformative $150 million partnership with the Rales Foundation, the Fellows program supports scholars across more than 120 eligible STEM master’s and doctoral programs at CMU.
Rales Fellows receive a comprehensive, cohort-based experience; faculty mentorship; exclusive professional development and networking event opportunities with academic and industry leaders; personalized coaching from a dedicated career adviser; and a financial award that covers tuition, as well as a monthly stipend for living expenses. By connecting with others who share their passion for progress and creativity, the program empowers Rales Fellows to become leaders and changemakers in their areas of expertise.
“Carnegie Mellon University is thrilled to induct our second cohort of CMU Rales Fellows,” said CMU President Farnam Jahanian (opens in new window) . “Together with the Rales Foundation, we are building a new generation of STEM trailblazers whose talents and brilliance will benefit humanity and — in turn — serve to honor the legacy of Norman and Ruth Rales in extraordinary ways.”
This year’s group comprises three Ph.D. and 31 master’s students from 18 graduate programs across CMU’s four eligible colleges, representing 27 undergraduate institutions and a broad geographic range including 20 U.S. states.
“We’re honored to welcome our 2026 cohort,” said Moisés Padilla, executive director for the Rales Fellows Program. “This year’s group is made up of individuals who understand that the best ideas come from many minds working together. We look forward to seeing what they will achieve at Carnegie Mellon, in their fields and in communities around the world.”
Applications (opens in new window) are being accepted now for the 2026 cohort of Rales Fellows. The priority review deadline is Dec. 15. Prospective scholars can visit cmu.edu/graduate/rales-fellows (opens in new window) to learn more about the program and register for upcoming online information sessions.
The 2025 Rales Fellows
Noemi Banda Master’s Candidate Mellon College of Science Computational Biology
Arturo Bohuchot Master’s Candidate College of Engineering Information Security
Laila Dancy Master’s Candidate School of Computer Science Human-Computer Interaction
Michael Gomez Master’s Candidate College of Engineering Engineering and Technology Innovation Management
Jacob Lawrence Master’s Candidate College of Engineering Information Security
Teddi Bishop Master’s Candidate College of Engineering Biomedical Engineering
Edward Chanquin Master’s Candidate School of Computer Science Human-Computer Interaction
Nolan Golden Master’s Candidate School of Computer Science Human-Computer Interaction
Melissa Juarez Master’s Candidate Dietrich College of Humanities and Social Sciences Applied Data Science
Jay Louissaint Master’s Candidate Dietrich College of Humanities and Social Sciences Applied Data Science
Soﬁa Loya Master’s Candidate College of Engineering Mechanical Engineering - Research
Kayla McFarlane Master’s Candidate School of Computer Science Robotics
Christopher Obiozor Master’s Candidate College of Engineering Mechanical Engineering - Research
Jordan Quinones Master’s Candidate College of Engineering Artiﬁcial Intelligence Engineering
Dominick Robinson Master’s Candidate Dietrich College of Humanities and Social Sciences Applied Data Science
Zury Marroquin Master’s Candidate Mellon College of Science Data Analytics for Science
Julian Millan Master’s Candidate College of Engineering Mechanical Engineering - Research
Olapeju Otusajo Master’s Candidate School of Computer Science Human-Computer Interaction
Zeltzin Reyes Trejo Master’s Candidate College of Engineering Engineering and Public Policy
Grace Rojo Ph.D. Candidate Mellon College of Science Mathematical Sciences
Melanie Saenzpardo Master’s Candidate College of Engineering Electrical and Computer Engineering
Meilin Scott Master’s Candidate School of Computer Science Automated Science
Elizabeth Smith Ph.D. Candidate Mellon College of Science Chemistry
Lauren Smith Master’s Candidate School of Computer Science Human-Computer Interaction
Habiba Tawﬁq Master’s Candidate College of Engineering Integrated Innovation for Products and Services
Caitlyn Santiago Master’s Candidate College of Engineering Mechanical Engineering
Ramiya Shelton Master’s Candidate College of Engineering Biomedical Engineering - Research
Kynnedy Smith Ph.D. Candidate School of Computer Science Human-Computer Interaction
Noah Stein Master’s Candidate College of Engineering Mechanical Engineering
Chloe Yawen Taylor Master’s Candidate College of Engineering Information Security
Bethany Vázquez Smith Master’s Candidate Mellon College of Science Computational Biology
Claire Vlases Master’s Candidate School of Computer Science Human-Computer Interaction
Haylee Viramontes Master’s Candidate College of Engineering Information Security
Emily Wan Master’s Candidate School of Computer Science Computer Science