Carnegie Mellon's Heinz College of Information Systems and Public Policy (opens in new window) and College of Engineering (opens in new window) have launched new online graduate certificates (opens in new window) . Both programs are offered entirely online, so students can learn these transformative skills from anywhere at their own pace.
The new certificate in Managing AI Systems (opens in new window) is designed to train managers who can bridge the gap between the technical experts who design AI tools and the organizational leaders and who can benefit from utilizing these tools.
The AI Engineering for Digital Twins & Analytics (opens in new window) program aims to equip civil engineers with principles and techniques to close the loop between physical and digital worlds. Using these technologies allows students to learn to more accurately predict, control and manage each unique project, process, building or environment throughout its lifecycle.
Managing AI Systems
Artificial intelligence is rapidly creating new solutions — and new problems — across every industry. Leaders want their organizations to implement AI so they don’t fall behind, but many of them don’t know how to integrate it into their work or understand the ways AI could help. “We have heard a lot from our government and non-profit partners, and from industry, that there’s a need for translators — people who understand what AI can do and how to implement it in a responsible way,” explained Jackie Speedy (opens in new window) , associate dean of public policy and management at Heinz College. “We have a deep bench of management, technology, and policy experts among our faculty who can help. This certificate program is designed to address the specific needs that leaders have been sharing with us for the last couple of years.” Expert AI faculty (opens in new window) from CMU’s Heinz College will teach participants how to manage AI systems through a systems-thinking approach.
Students will learn:
What AI technology entails.
When and how to implement AI solutions.
The ethical implications of AI solutions.
How to manage AI adoption across an organization.
“At Carnegie Mellon, we believe that everyone has a role to play in driving AI adoption within their workplace, regardless of technical expertise. Within this program we hope to support individuals to gain the capacity and confidence to engage with AI systems,” said Rachel Dzombak (opens in new window) , faculty member. “In this program, students will learn what they need to successfully lead AI initiatives within their organizations.” The 12-month program is entirely online, with graduate-level, credit-bearing courses. Participants can start in January, May, or August, and scholarships are available. The courses are taught by world-class CMU professors, with live-online sessions held one-to-two times every two weeks for 60-90 minutes in the evening.
AI Engineering for Digital Twins & Analytics
The new graduate certificate program from the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering (opens in new window) is equipping current engineers with the power of AI-enabled digital twins.
“With an understanding of AI and digital twin technologies, we have more reliable and actionable  information than ever before at our fingertips to make better decisions, predictions, and models,” said Burcu Akinci (opens in new window) , head of the department of civil and environmental engineering. “The principles and techniques taught in this certificate will help civil engineers close the loop between physical and digital worlds. We are teaching students how to use these technologies to accurately predict, control, and manage each unique project, process, building or environment throughout its lifecycle.”
Students will take two graduate-level courses, starting with Principles of Digital Twins and moving on to Digital Twins and AI for Predictive Analytics, taught by Associate Professor Pingbo Tang (opens in new window) and Professor Mario Bergés (opens in new window) . The program can be completed in just two semesters and is designed especially for working professionals looking to advance their knowledge and bring cutting-edge technologies back to their organizations.
Applications for both certificates are now open. View more information and apply for the Managing AI Systems (opens in new window) and AI Engineering for Digital Twins & Analytics (opens in new window) certificates on the program websites.