“Dr. Martin brings significant expertise and momentum to her new role,” said CMU Provost James H. Garrett Jr (opens in new window) . “Her strong record of scholarship, leadership and engagement across academia, policy and industry will be instrumental in shaping Heinz College's future success as it continues its trajectory as an innovative education and research ecosystem.”
Martin’s research examines the ethical implications of emerging technologies and the role of business in ensuring responsible innovation. She served as the technology and business ethics editor for the Journal of Business Ethics and a board member and president of the Society for Business Ethics. She is currently on the program committee of the Privacy Law Scholars Conference.
“People, policy and technology — and the ways they intersect — define our era and will shape humanity’s future. I’m honored and energized to lead Heinz College, an institution that’s long been ahead of the curve, weaving these forces into the core of its mission to drive meaningful societal impact,” said Martin, who holds a bachelor's degree in industrial and operations engineering from the University of Michigan, as well as doctoral and MBA degrees from the University of Virginia's Darden School of Business.
Martin succeeds Ramayya Krishnan (opens in new window) , who has led the college since being named interim dean in 2008 and appointed dean in 2009. Under his leadership, Heinz College has grown its interdisciplinary approach through innovative education, impactful research initiatives and deepening its global partnerships. Krishnan will return to the faculty following a successful tenure of more than 16 years.
“Dr. Martin's leadership builds on Dean Krishnan's outstanding 16-year legacy, and I am delighted that Dean Krishnan will return to his vital role in CMU's teaching and research as a faculty member,” Garrett said.
Martin’s appointment follows a comprehensive international search led by Richard Scheines (opens in new window) , the Bess Family Dean of the Dietrich College of Humanities and Social Sciences, and Amelia Haviland (opens in new window) , the Eugene Barone Professor of Health Systems Management at Heinz College.