Generative artificial intelligence didn’t write this, but it wouldn't be surprising if it did.
In just a few years, the development and applications of generative AI and large language models (LLMs) have exploded, finding their way into how people work, create, and interact with technology and each other. It’s everywhere and it’s growing.
To master this emerging and game-changing technology, Carnegie Mellon University has launched a new, online Graduate Certificate in Generative AI and Large Language Models (opens in new window) . Faculty from CMU’s School of Computer Science (opens in new window) will teach the latest and most advanced techniques in generative AI, large language models and multimodal machine learning.
“Generative AI is reshaping the technology landscape,” said Carolyn Rose (opens in new window) , the certificate’s faculty program director and a professor in both the Human-Computer Interaction Institute (opens in new window) and the Language Technologies Institute (opens in new window) . “If you want to contribute to its evolution and make an immediate impact in your organization, now is the time to enhance your expertise.”
Generative AI and LLMs went mainstream in late 2022, when the first chatbot powered by these tools was released. More models, chatbots, and image and video creators quickly followed. But SCS had been working with generative AI and LLMs for years. They pioneered their development; discovered early applications; and continue to push for safety, security, ethics and responsible use as the tools progress.
The 12-month program includes three credit-bearing, graduate-level courses. In the online courses taught live by world-renowned faculty, program participants will develop foundational skills for understanding, working with, and adapting existing tools and technologies; explore the fundamental mathematical concepts in machine learning and deep learning; and learn how to design and implement scalable LLM systems. Applicants should have a degree in computer science or a related field, proficiency in applied math and statistics, Python programming expertise, and machine learning and deep learning experience.
Applications are open. For more information, visit the Graduate Certificate in Generative AI and Large Language Models website (opens in new window) .