As the doors of the new $105 million Highmark Center for Health, Wellness and Athletics (opens in new window) are now open, leaders at Carnegie Mellon University look forward to welcoming students, faculty and staff to the many spaces that comprise the 160,000 square foot building.
Along with gifts from more than 300 alumni, parents, faculty and staff, the Highmark Center is made possible by a $35 million lead gift from Highmark Inc. (opens in new window) , an independent licensee of the Blue Cross Blue Shield association and one of the largest Blue plans in the country. The center is a destination that offers a holistic approach to well-being through robust services and educational programs supporting body, mind and spirit.
“It’s a space where students will be invited to be curious and explore what wellness and health mean to them while building pride in being part of the Tartan community,” said Gina Casalegno (opens in new window) , vice president for Student Affairs (opens in new window) and dean of students at CMU.
With its official dedication scheduled for Oct. 24, the Highmark Center is as much an educational space as any other at Carnegie Mellon, said Maureen Dasey-Morales, associate vice president of Community Health and Well-Being (opens in new window) .
“Learning takes place across campus — in the classroom and in learning how to care for yourself and manage stress — so that students can accomplish all of the professional and academic goals they set for themselves,” she said. With new full-service clinical areas for University Health Services (opens in new window) (UHS); private and supportive spaces for Counseling and Psychological Services (opens in new window) (CaPS); spaces to explore wellness and meaning-making; and a modern athletics facility for practice, performance, training and athlete care, the Highmark Center’s opening is just the beginning of opportunities for student well-being on campus. “This facility changes the way we’re able to do the things our community is passionate about, and lets us think differently about the way that we support our students as they pursue their athletic dreams, health and wellness at Carnegie Mellon,” said Josh Centor (opens in new window) , associate vice president of student affairs and director of athletics, physical education and recreation.
In addition to all of the aesthetic and practical elements, the building was constructed with sustainability in mind, working toward a LEED Gold certification, said Utkarsh Ghildyal, associate director of design for Campus Design and Facility Development (opens in new window) (CDFD). With initial planning that started following the publication of Carnegie Mellon’s 10-year strategic plan in 2015 (opens in new window) , followed by a design process that occurred during the COVID-19 pandemic, Ghildyal said it’s gratifying to see the doors to the building finally open to the campus community.
“All along we’ve had a great working group among Student Affairs, campus partners, students, design team and construction manager, who all helped and contributed,” he said. “It’s a fantastic thing, especially the way it will impact students to enhance their CMU experience and encourage them to seek wellness.”