Carnegie Mellon University is tied for second nationally in schools with a top 10 rating in at least 28 specialty rankings, according to the 2026 U.S. News & World Report Best Colleges rankings (opens in new window) , released Tuesday, Sept. 23.
Earning a place among the top 20 universities in the United States, Carnegie Mellon ranks No. 1 in seven undergraduate programs — adding analytics and programming languages to last year's top-ranked fields of artificial intelligence, cybersecurity, information systems, mobile/web applications and software engineering.
"A Carnegie Mellon education has long been synonymous with excellence in academics, research and innovation," said President Farnam Jahanian (opens in new window) . "The latest rankings results reaffirm this view and reflect the exceptional capacity of CMU faculty, students and programs to lead and thrive within our rapidly changing world."
This year’s rankings underscore the measurable impact of Carnegie Mellon’s strategic and sustained efforts to elevate student success. The university’s approach to excellence is holistic, encompassing not only academic rigor but also financial accessibility, student well-being and institutional accountability — reflecting a whole-of-university investment. The university has made significant institutional investments that have led to higher graduation and retention rates, which are key metrics in the report’s methodology. Among the most impactful initiatives is the CMU Pathway Program , which has helped reduce the financial strain on students by decreasing their reliance on loans.
“Carnegie Mellon’s advancement in the 2026 U.S. News & World Report rankings is a direct reflection of our ongoing commitment to student success and institutional excellence,” said James H. Garrett Jr. (opens in new window) , provost and chief academic officer at CMU. “This achievement clearly signals that our strategic investments in student success, access and affordability are making a real impact. This is evidenced by higher graduation and retention rates as well as reduced federal loan indebtedness at graduation. This collective effort advances the opportunity for a more accessible, high-quality CMU education.”