The spotlight shone bright on several Carnegie Mellon University alumni at Radio City Hall in New York during The 78 th Annual Tony Awards on Sunday, June 8.
The theatre community honored the 2024-2025 Broadway performances and productions during a multiplatform preshow on Pluto TV, Paramount+ and a primetime telecast on CBS.
Throughout the evening, Carnegie Mellon University alumni were among the award show performers, including Renée Elise Goldsberry (1993 School of Drama alumna) and Leslie Odom, Jr. (2003 School of Drama alumnus), who reunited with original castmates for a special moment to celebrate the tenth anniversary of “Hamilton.” Goldsberry and Odom both won Tonys in 2016 for their “Hamilton” roles. CMU alumni were also presenters, nominees, winners and advocates for theatre education.
CMU has a long-standing tradition of producing top talent onstage and behind the scenes. Its School of Drama (opens in new window) is the oldest degree-granting drama school in the country and consistently ranks as one of the world's best drama schools.
2025 CMU Alumni Tony Award Winners
Natalie Venetia Belcon Actress in a Featured Role in a Musical “Buena Vista Social Club” 1991 School of Drama alumna
Jamie deRoy Best Revival of a Musical “Sunset Blvd.” producer, 1967 graduate of the College of Fine Arts
Former CMU faculty member Paul Tazewell also won Best Costume Design of a Musical for “Death Becomes Her.”
“The Carnegie Mellon community is thrilled to have the brilliance and talents of our performing arts alumni recognized once again by the Tony Awards,” said CMU President Farnam Jahanian (opens in new window) . “They are among the most inspiring and influential forces in theatre arts today. Congratulations to all of this year’s winners and nominees!”
The Tony Awards and CMU Honor Arts Educator from Brooklyn, N.Y.
In 2014, the Tony Awards and Carnegie Mellon co-founded the annual Excellence in Theatre Education Award to recognize top K-12 drama teachers across the U.S. and to celebrate arts education.
This year, Robert Ramirez (opens in new window) , head of the CMU School of Drama, Dan Amboyer, CMU alumnus and one of the judges for this year’s award, and CMU President Jahanian, presented the 2025 Excellence in Theatre Education Award to Gary Edwin Robinson, the head of the Theatre Arts Program at Boys and Girls High School in Brooklyn, New York.
VIDEO
Robinson was honored for championing access to an education in the arts for all students, creating programming to expose students to real-world opportunities and art, and fostering an environment that inspires them to set goals beyond the stage by highlighting the value of higher education. A panel of theatre experts from the American Theatre Wing, The Broadway League and Carnegie Mellon University selected Robinson from a nationwide call for entries.
During the Tony Awards live telecast on CBS, Robinson was recognized by CMU alumna and Tony and Grammy Award Winner Renée Elise Goldsberry.
Carnegie Mellon is the first-ever, exclusive higher education partner of the Tony Awards. In addition to the Tony-night spotlight, Robinson receives a $10,000 grant and a visiting master class for his students taught by CMU Drama faculty.
For more information about CMU and the Tony Awards, visit cmu.edu/tony-awards (opens in new window) .