Involvement & Giving
Parents and families play an important role in our success and are encouraged to become active members of the university community, by becoming involved in the following ways:
Giving Opportunities
Parents and families are also invited to engage with Carnegie Mellon University through philanthropy. Your gift makes a significant and direct impact on your student and other students by helping to sustain and enhance the CMU experience, both in and outside the classroom, thus bringing world-class faculty and resources to CMU. Learn more about what you can make possible with a gift to CMU .
We encourage parents and families to support a fund that is meaningful to you or your student with a donation of any size. For more information on leadership giving, learn about the Parents Leadership Circle .
Thank you for considering a gift to Carnegie Mellon!
College of Engineering
CIT Parents Fund
The CIT Parent's Fund directly supports hands-on undergraduate research, professional development and service learning programs in the College of Engineering.
Give Now
College of Fine Arts
CFA Dean's Innovation Fund
The CFA Dean’s Innovation Fund provides resources for the Dean to address the greatest current needs of the College of Fine Arts.
Give Now
Dietrich College of Humanities & Social Sciences
Parents Fund
The Dietrich College Parents Fund allows the college to address unexpected challenges created by the pandemic, giving students an opportunity to participate fully in their degree program and further supplement their education with additional outside learning opportunities.
Give Now
Heinz College of Information Systems & Public Policy
Heinz dean's innovation fund
Provides Dean Krishnan with resources to react quickly to emerging opportunities for new courses, research and partnership. These funds are critical in bringing the passion and abilities of our students and faculty to bear on global problems that require “Intelligent Action.”
Mellon College of Science (MCS)
MCS Parents Fund
The MCS Parent’s Fund enhances the academic and social experience for MCS students. This unrestricted fund allows the college to respond to the needs of our students quickly in areas such as financial aid, student life and academic support.
School of Computer Science (SCS)
SCS Parents Fund
The SCS Parent’s Fund supports the varied and often unexpected needs of SCS students through gifts from parents of current and past SCS students.
Tepper School of Business
Tepper Parents Fund
The Tepper Parents Fund supports undergraduate programs and initiatives that enhance the Tepper student experience including, but not limited to, networking activities, school spirit programming and community-building events.
Student's Greatest Needs
The CMU Fund
Contributions to the CMU Fund further strengthen the university’s ability to conduct cutting-edge research and high-quality education that impacts the public interest.