August 15, 2020 - September 5, 2021
Bouke de Vries: War and Pieces
A special installation at The Frick Art Museum presents Dutch contemporary artist Bouke de Vries' interpretation of an 18th-century tablescape with a sprawling assemblage of porcelain fragments resembling a nuclear wasteland. A former conservator of art objects, de Vries resurrects broken porcelain shards that would otherwise have been discarded and uses them to create new artworks that tackle both contemporary and historic issues.
March 6, 2021 - May 30, 2021
Frida Kahlo—An Intimate Portrait: The Photographic Albums
This exhibition provides rare and moving insight into the personal life of one of the 20th century's most iconic artists. Through 115 photographs selected from her private albums, this exhibition allows us to see Kahlo through the eyes of friends, family, and other noted photographic artists.
March 6, 2021 - May 9, 2021
Frida Kahlo: Through the Lens of Nickolas Muray
Photographic portraits dating from 1937 to 1946 explore Muray's unique perspective as Kahlo's friend, lover, and confidant, while highlighting Kahlo's deep interest in her Mexican heritage, her life and travels, and the family and friends around her.
March 17, 2021 - March 10, 2024
Reckoning: Grief and Light
Back by popular demand! A multisensory installation of sculpture by Artist-in-Residence Vanessa German explores the capacity of museums to function as spaces of public reckoning. Immerse yourself in this meditation on grief, love, and social healing -- a visual elegy to George Floyd, Breonna Taylor, Elijah McClain, and other lives lost at the hands of police, accompanied by symphonic music inspired by the history of Africans enslaved on rice plantations.
April 24, 2021 - November 28, 2021
Cast in Chrome: The Art of Hood Ornaments
Over the history of motoring, hood ornaments evolved from the practical (externally mounted radiator caps) to the purely decorative. Today, only a few luxury brands continue the tradition. Why were hood ornaments so popular and what led to their near demise?
May 12, 2021 - May 30, 2021
decolonizing: intimate family portraiture
Inspired by the personal photographs in Frida Kahlo—An Intimate Portrait , 13 women artists of the locally based #notwhite collective selected photographs from our their own family albums to create an intimate, collective portrait of themselves. Through their photos, they share experiences that bind them together—love, joy, family, loss—and express their unique cultural identities.