Spaces for Nonprofits and Local Artists
We are pleased to provide free, low-cost, and reduced price venues for nonprofits and local artists to showcase their art. Our spaces are designed to support creativity and bring your vision to life. We also offer marketing packages to help promote your event.
Three Stories: Peirce Theater
Three Stories is a flexible space designed with artists in mind. This three-level building is a resource for the community, with free hall rentals for small to mid-sized arts organizations and individual artists. Amenities include a 95-seat theater with AEA dressing rooms as well as rehearsal spaces.
Three Stories: 3rd Floor
Three Stories is a flexible space designed with artists in mind. This three-level building is a resource for the community, with free hall rentals for small to mid-sized arts organizations and individual artists. Amenities include a 95-seat theater with AEA dressing rooms as well as rehearsal spaces.
Rohr Building: Peirce Studio
From events and performances to workshops and meetings, the Peirce Studio has done it all. Located in the James E. Rohr Arts Education Center, this versatile black box theater will serve as our reception for the evening, giving you a chance to mingle and explore how you can make this room your own.
Greer Cabaret: Theater
A beautiful performance space with cutting-edge technology. Small arts organizations and individual artists will have the opportunity for discounted rentals of this 198-seat venue.
Greer Cabaret: Lounge
A space perfect for parties, small performances, and events.
Byham Theater: Main Stage
The Byham Theater in Pittsburgh is a beautifully restored medium-sized venue, perfect for hosting live performances such as theater productions, concerts, and special events. With its historic charm, advanced stage facilities, and excellent acoustics, it offers an ideal setting for putting on memorable shows. The Byham Theater combines the intimacy of a smaller space with the modern amenities needed to create an exceptional experience for both performers and audiences.