Buy from the Official Ticket Source
The Pittsburgh Cultural Trust is a non-profit organization dedicated to bringing you quality arts, entertainment, and education programs at affordable prices. The following are official Pittsburgh Cultural Trust sources to purchase tickets to our events and programs:
Pittsburgh Cultural Trust Official Ticket Source: TrustArts.org
By Phone: 412-456-6666; 412-456-4800 for PNC Broadway in Pittsburgh events; Season Tickets 412-456-1390; Group Sales 412-471-6930
In Person: At the Venue Box Office or at Theater Square located at 655 Penn Avenue in Downtown Pittsburgh
We highly recommend that patrons purchase from official ticket sources for the best seats, best service, and best price.
Cultural District and Resident Company Official Ticket Sources:
CulturalDistrict.org August Wilson African American Cultural Center Pittsburgh Ballet Theatre Pittsburgh CLO Pittsburgh Opera Pittsburgh Public Theater Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra
WHEN TICKETS ARE PURCHASED FROM UNOFFICIAL SOURCES:
You pay more than face value.
Your tickets may not be real
Your tickets cannot be replaced when lost or stolen.
We cannot contact you with crucial information on show cancellations, time changes, road closures or traffic updates, upcoming shows or other useful information.
You are not directly supporting a non-profit organization.
You are contributing to a practice that makes it harder for true fans to see their favorite shows without paying a premium charge.
Tickets purchased from unofficial sources are done so at a risk. By purchasing only from the official source you are assured that the ticket you receive is valid and is being sold to you at current face value.
Ticket Resale Policy
Tickets purchased from official ticket sources cannot be resold, transferred or distributed to any ticket broker or any other person or entity for resale above the face value of the ticket. Should it come to the Pittsburgh Cultural Trust's attention that a ticket purchaser is a ticket broker, all current and future orders may be cancelled without notice or justification of action. The Pittsburgh Cultural Trust reserves the right to deny admission to any person with a ticket obtained in violation of these terms.
NEED HELP?
Please feel free to contact us at 412-456-6666, or visit our contact page .