Group Tickets
Welcome to the Group Ticket Sales Department! Who can buy 10 or more tickets? ANYONE! Why do people buy 10 or more tickets? ANY REASON!
To name a few: Special Occasions, Holiday Gifts, Client Entertainment, Fundraisers, Membership Events, Employee Incentives, Scout & Educational Outings, Fun with Family, Friends & Co-workers OR just to save money!
We offer our unique experiences for private outings, corporate off-sites, staff member rewards, client entertaining, and many special occasions including anniversaries, birthdays, bachelor/ bachelorette parties, and family gatherings.
BENEFITS
VIDEO
The benefits of bringing a group include:
Purchase tickets BEFORE they go on sale to the public. Keep adding to your order AFTER they go on sale!
You can even add after your final payment is made; the price just may change.
Discounts are available for most shows. Bigger discount may be available BEFORE tickets go on sale to the public.
Order now, collect the funds and pay by your due date. Some shows even reward groups for ordering early and paying right away. (Some restrictions may apply)
Everyone may be able to sit together.
Group name on the video board at the Benedum Center.
Extra perks including workshops, guest lectures, talk backs and study guides (subject to availability).
As long as tickets are available, group tickets are available.
Bus Parking
For our guests traveling by motorcoach or school bus, please see our bus parking information sheet .
To order group tickets:
Call 412-471-6930 or email groupsales@trustarts.org
Submit a Group Ticket Reservation Form to order tickets in advance of the public on sale.
Buy online NOW . Group Sales rate will already be applied if purchasing from the group sales page. Online option is only available after tickets have gone on sale to the public and may not be available for all shows. If available, choosing Select Your Own Seat offers the best flexibility when purchasing 10+ tickets online.
Mailing Address:
Pittsburgh Cultural Trust Group Sales Department 803 Liberty Avenue Pittsburgh, PA 15222
Child Policy:
Regardless of age, all patrons must have a ticket. Unless an event is designated for younger audiences, children under the age of 3 will not be admitted to the Benedum Center, Byham Theater, Heinz Hall or Greer Cabaret at Theater Square. Children under the age of 12 will not be admitted to Liberty Magic. All children must be seated with an adult. Please ask when ordering your tickets if this rule applies to your show.
Ticket Resale Policy
Tickets purchased from official ticket sources cannot be resold, transferred or distributed to any ticket broker or any other person or entity for resale above the face value of the ticket. Should it come to the Pittsburgh Cultural Trust's attention that a ticket purchaser is a ticket broker, all current and future orders may be cancelled without notice or justification of action. The Pittsburgh Cultural Trust reserves the right to deny admission to any person with a ticket obtained in violation of these terms.