Visit
Pittsburgh's 14-block Cultural District is home to art galleries, public art, and special events all year long. Discover art from around the world and around the corner, only in the Cultural District.
Map
Explore the Cultural District's galleries and public art in this interactive map. Click on a point of interest for more information.
Want a map to print out or save for later? Download one below.
Public Art Events
While the Pittsburgh Cultural Trust's visual art galleries and public art installations are open to visit all year long, special events can enhance your Cultural District visual arts experience. Learn more about the Gallery Crawl in the Cultural District — a quarterly free, one-night-only, multi-venue showcase of Pittsburgh’s dynamic art and entertainment scene — and the Dollar Bank Three Rivers Arts Festival — a ten-day celebration of the arts held every June — at the links below.
Public Transportation
There are many ways to use public transportation to get to the Cultural District including Pittsburgh Regional Transit buses, "T" light-rail service and Pittsburgh's famous inclines. For schedules, rates and general information about these services, visit Pittsburgh Regional Transit's online Trip Planner or call 412-442-2000. Please note that the Pittsburgh Regional Transit buses are free for travel within the downtown zone until 7 pm; the "T" is always free downtown.
Biking
Travelling by bike is a great way to access the Cultural District, and you can use one of our public art bike racks once you get to your destination! Visit BikePGH for resources to help with planning your trip. And even if you don't own a bike, visiting the Cultural District on two wheels is made easy by POGOH , Pittsburgh's local bike share program.
Parking
With ParkPGH, a project of The Pittsburgh Cultural Trust, you can find real-time parking information for garages in Downtown Pittsburgh. Click here for garage parking in the Cultural District .
A project of The Pittsburgh Cultural Trust