Undergraduate and graduate students are eligible for ticket discounts of up to 50% off select Pittsburgh Cultural Trust performances.
Taking advantage of this opportunity is easy!
1. Click on your university’s logo and purchase your discounted tickets. If your university is not listed, please select OTHER UNIVERSITIES for a general university student option.
2. Pick up your ticket order at the venue's box office starting two hours prior to show time. Bring a form of valid student identification (ID card, transcript, report card, or other proof of enrollment). Mobile ticketing may also be available for select performances.
Faculty and staff of local universities with valid university ID are eligible for discounted tickets. Prices, shows, and seating are subject to tour requirements and availability. Some restrictions may apply.
Other Ways to Save
Join our student email list
Sign up for our student email list and be the first to know about our student discounts!
Festivals, classes, & workshops
The Pittsburgh Cultural Trust offers a number of free and low cost opportunities for students to engage in the city through the arts, including annual public art festivals, four Gallery Crawls per year, and a number of classes & workshops taught by leading arts educators in Pittsburgh.
Take a look at what upcoming events are available. Bring your friends and your energy!
To order Groups 10+ tickets:
Call 412-471-6930 or email groupsales@trustarts.org
Submit a Group Ticket Reservation Form to order tickets in advance of the public on sale
Buy online NOW by selecting the “Groups 10+ tickets on sale here” link that appears after you select your date when purchasing tickets . By clicking this link it automatically changes the price of the tickets and allows you to purchase more than 10 tickets. Choosing Select Your Own Seat offers the best flexibility when purchasing 10+ tickets online. Online option is only available after tickets have gone on sale to the public and may not be available for all shows.