Until recently, large numbers of killed and wounded
were an inevitable part of warfare.
Casualties
By John T. Correll
R EMEMBRANCE of the people worst was the Civil War, with nearly Until recently, heavy casualties
who didn’t come home is a 620,000 military dead—360,000 were presumed to be an inevitable
standard element of war me- Union, 258,000 Confederate—the consequence of warfare. It was not
morials, but, for the Viet- total of battle deaths and deaths from until the Gulf War of 1991 that an-
nam Veterans Memorial in Wash- other causes, such as disease. More other possibility began to emerge.
ington, it is the central theme. There, than 15 percent of those who served Prior to the Gulf War, the Center
inscribed on the black granite wall, died in the war. Never again, not for Strategic and International Stud-
are the names of more than 58,000 even in World War II, did our casu- ies estimated that the casualties
Americans who died in Vietnam. alty rate rise to such a level. would reach 15,000. Gen. H. Norman
The casualties are still starkly re- Carnage in the two World Wars Schwarzkopf, commander of coali-
membered today. Part of the reason was devastating. In The Face of tion forces, estimated 5,000.
was their unprecedented visibility. Battle, historian John Keegan re- That didn’t happen. Operation
Vietnam was the first war we watched counts how the British took 419,654 Desert Storm consisted of an extraor-
on television. It was a forerunner of casualties at the Somme in 1916. dinarily effective 38-day air campaign
what would later be called “the CNN There were 60,000 casualties the first that left the enemy reeling, followed
effect.” day, “of whom 21,000 had been by a four-day air–land finale.
Casualties in Vietnam were low killed, most in the first hour of the Iraq’s command and control was
compared with previous wars. The attack, perhaps the first minutes.” eliminated the first night. By the
48 AIR FORCE Magazine / June 2003
time the ground offensive began, the increased precision meant less Carl von Clausewitz, Prussian of-
about half of Iraq’s armor had been collateral damage. ficer and famed military theorist,
destroyed, and between 50 and 75 The air war over Serbia in 1999, based his views largely on his analy-
percent of the troops in the first two operations in Afghanistan since 2001, sis of the Napoleonic Wars. “Of all
echelons were killed or captured, or and the opening rounds of Gulf War the possible aims in war, the de-
had deserted. II supplied further evidence of a new struction of the enemy’s armed forces
Total casualties for the coalition way of war. The operations were always appears as the highest,”
were 247 battle deaths (148 for the highly successful, and the casualties Clausewitz said in On War (1832),
US, 99 for the allies) and 901 wounded were low. adding that “destruction of the en-
(467 for the US, 434 for the allies). US forces had zero combat losses emy forces is the overriding prin-
Was the Gulf War a turning point in Kosovo and Serbia. After a year ciple of war.”
in the history of warfare, or was it a and a half, the total dead in Opera- The German military historian
fluke? Gen. John Michael Loh, com- tion Enduring Freedom in Afghani- Hans Delbrück described this ap-
mander of Tactical Air Command, stan, Middle East, the Philippines, proach as the “strategy of annihila-
said in 1992 that the American pub- and elsewhere was 76. tion.” It assumed and accepted high
lic had a new standard of expecta- Before Operation Iraqi Freedom casualties on both sides. Historian
tions, that the US armed forces would began in March 2003, there were Russell F. Weigley says, “The strat-
“win quickly, decisively, with over- predictions of as many as 5,000 US egy of annihilation became charac-
whelming advantage, and with few troops killed and up to 30,000 total teristically the American way in war.”
casualties.” US casualties. (At the other end of That was Gen. Ulysses S. Grant’s
the forecasting spectrum was the strategy in the final phase of the
A New Way of War expectation that it would be a “cake- Civil War. Departing from the more
In 1996, Air Force Chief of Staff walk.”) cautious approaches of his prede-
Gen. Ronald R. Fogleman said the Apprehension grew as the opera- cessors, Grant threw the mass of his
nation was on the verge of “a new tion got under way. On March 24, Army of the Potomac, again and
American way of war.” after just five days of war, an edito- again, against Robert E. Lee’s re-
“America has not only the oppor- rial in USA Today proclaimed that treating Army of Northern Virginia.
tunity but the obligation to transi- “Mounting US Casualties Dispel Grant’s campaign was marked by
tion from a concept of annihilation Modern War Myths.” It said that the the large numbers of killed and
and attrition warfare that places losses “can’t help but test the public’s wounded. To get the job done, he
thousands of young Americans at resolve,” but might: “knock down a was willing to accept higher casual-
risk in brute, force-on-force con- dangerous conceit of the antiseptic ties than he inflicted.
flicts to a concept that leverages war.” At that point in the fighting, In the first month, according to
our sophisticated military capabili- known US losses, both those killed Weigley, the Army of the Potomac
ties to achieve US objectives by in action and in accidents, were 20. “suffered 55,000 casualties, not far
applying what I like to refer to as an When Baghdad fell on April 9— from the total strength with which
‘asymmetric force’ strategy,” he the 21st day of the conflict—the to- the rival Army of Northern Virginia
said. tal of US dead was just over 100. began the month.” Lee’s army took
Instead of engaging the enemy in In April, Gen. Richard B. Myers, 32,000 casualties that month, but Lee
what Fogleman called “a bloody Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, had more difficulty than Grant did in
slugfest on the ground,” US forces used the same phrase as Fogleman— replenishing his ranks.
could put greater reliance on their “a new American way of war”—to Grant eventually won but after-
advantages in information superior- describe Operation Iraqi Freedom. ward was unable to shed his reputa-
ity and precision strike. Myers said that precision and focus tion as a butcher.
The improvement in airpower was had allowed US, British, and Aus-
especially significant. tralian forces to “strike directly at The World Wars and Vietnam
In World War II, the circular error the heart of the regime” in Iraq while The strategy of annihilation pre-
probable—the standard Air Force minimizing collateral damage and vailed through the World Wars. All
measure of bombing effectiveness— harm to the Iraqi people. of the nations engaged in those wars
for a B-17 dropping gravity bombs accepted casualties as a grim neces-
was 3,300 feet. It took a lot of bombs The Napoleonic Model sity, but Hitler was one of the few
to be sure of hitting the target. The evolution of casualty rates in who expended the lives of his troops
In the Vietnam War, the CEP was warfare is a function of changes in recklessly.
400 feet. By the Gulf War, it was both military technology and in stra- Hitler ordered the beleaguered
down to 10 feet. A single stealthy tegic concepts of operation. German Army not to surrender at
aircraft could penetrate the defenses After 1800, war had generally fol- Stalingrad in 1943, declaring that
and achieve, with two laser guided lowed the Napoleonic model. The “the duty of the men at Stalingrad is
bombs, what would have taken 1,000 objective was destruction of the to be dead.” Sixty thousand Ger-
sorties in World War II or 30 sorties enemy’s army in the field and occu- mans were killed at Stalingrad. An-
in Vietnam. pation of his country. “I see only one other 110,000 were captured by the
That made it possible to focus the thing, namely the enemy’s main body. Soviets and few of them ever came
attack, striking with great accuracy I try to crush it, confident that sec- home.
and economy. Fewer of our forces ondary matters will then settle them- The military death toll for World
would be exposed to enemy fire, and selves,” Napoleon said. War II was a staggering 19.4 million
AIR FORCE Magazine / June 2003 49
killed in battle. Of those, 292,000
were Americans. The total of US mili- Casualties and Collateral Damage
tary deaths in World War II, counting
nonbattle deaths, was 405,000. Total “Casualties” include not only the killed and wounded but also losses
US dead in the Korean War were from disease, desertion, accidents, and troops taken prisoner or missing
37,000 and in the Vietnam War, in action. Attention centers on the numbers killed in action, but according
58,000. to the Oxford Companion to Military History, the Allied campaign in Italy
In Vietnam, the number of battle in World War II was the first in which combat casualties outnumbered
those caused by disease.
deaths was reduced by effective
“Collateral damage” has two components: nonmilitary structural dam-
search and rescue operations which
age and human casualties that occur in the course of striking valid,
quickly pulled the seriously wounded
approved military targets. Example: Damage to a civilian structure
out of firefights in the jungle and
located next to a military structure.
flew them to medical treatment by “Unintended damage” is the result of a targeting mistake, a weapon
helicopter. American losses in Viet- system malfunction, unforseen secondary effects, or other error. Ex-
nam were a fraction of those the amples: fin failure on a guided munition, hidden bunker beneath a
Viet Minh and the North Vietnam- structure, intelligence error.
ese were willing to accept in order
to defeat first the French and then
which described the supposed avoid-
From the Revolution to the Gulf
ance of US military action abroad,
and the “Weinberger Doctrine”—
US Military Casualties would figure in the casualty debates
30 years later.
Battle Other Wounds In 1984, Secretary of Defense
Deaths Deaths Not Mortal Caspar Weinberger announced a se-
ries of tests that should be met be-
Revolutionary War 4,435 — 6,188
fore US forces were committed to
War of 1812 2,260 — 4,505 combat. Was a vital national interest
at stake? Had other options been
Mexican War 1,733 11,550 4,152
exhausted? Would we commit suffi-
Civil War (Union forces only) 140,414 224,097 281,881 cient force to win, and did we have
the determination to stay the course?
Spanish–American War 385 2,061 1,662
These guidelines—sometimes called
World War I 53,402 63,114 204,002 the Weinberger–Powell Doctrine be-
World War II 291,557 113,842 671,846 cause Gen. Colin Powell, Chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff during
Korean War 33,652 3,262 103,284
the Gulf War, strongly agreed—were
Vietnam War 47,378 10,799 153,303 a reminder to avoid the mistakes of
Vietnam.
Desert Shield/Storm 148 145 467
The Weinberger Doctrine did not
suggest avoiding combat to prevent
casualties, although that accusation
Source: Department of Defense
would be made years later.
the United States. coverage had a strong influence on Effects-Based Operations
From 1959 to 1975, “more than public opinion. US capabilities demonstrated in
four million Vietnamese soldiers and But rising and visible casualties Gulf War I—mainly information
civilians on both sides—roughly 10 were only part of what soured the superiority, stealth, and precision
percent of the entire population— nation on Vietnam. The war was strike—were the leading indicators
were to be killed and wounded,” said tightly controlled by politicians in of what was called the “Revolution
Stanley Karnow in his comprehen- Washington. The US commitment in Military Affairs.”
sive history of the war. was halfhearted and vacillating. Mili- The capabilities got better as the
“Every minute, hundreds of thou- tary force was dribbled out in lim- decade went along.
sands of people die on this Earth,” ited actions and gradual escalation. American forces could see into
said Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap, North Field forces were required to re- enemy territory and track targets
Vietnam’s military leader. “The life port “body counts” of the enemy moving on the ground and in the air
or death of a hundred, a thousand, dead. These were notoriously inac- with deep-looking radar on E-3
tens of thousands of human beings, curate and fooled nobody. Body AWACS and E-8 Joint STARS air-
even our compatriots, means little.” counts gained such notoriety that to craft. Electronic emissions were moni-
The US was far less tolerant of this day, US forces do not attempt to tored. Circling drones fed live video
casualties, more so as the war bogged count or estimate enemy casualties. transmissions to gunships.
down and the prospect of victory Two products of the Vietnam ex- Over Kosovo, B-2 bombers struck
diminished. Unflinching television perience—the “Vietnam syndrome,” nightly from their home bases in the
50 AIR FORCE Magazine / June 2003
United States. Each aircraft attacked However, it was controversial for and three percent were ground to air.
16 different targets on a single sortie. a number of reasons, one of them “The problem is our weapons can
Under Napoleonic strategy, the being that it put more emphasis on kill at a greater range than we can
objective had been destruction of airpower and moved away from the identify a target as friend or foe,”
the enemy’s army. Now a new ap- clash of forces on the ground. Army Maj. Bill McKean told Ameri-
proach was possible. It was called can Forces Press Service in 1999.
Effects-Based Operations. Friendly Fire “Yet if you wait until you’re close
The objective was not to destroy “Friendly fire” casualties are those enough to be sure you are firing at an
the enemy but to gain a strategic inflicted by forces on one’s own side. enemy, you’ve lost your advantage.”
result. Destruction of the enemy was In Desert Storm, 35 Americans were
never more than a means to a strate- killed and 72 were wounded by Civilian Casualties
gic end, not an end in itself. friendly fire. Wars have always caused civilian
In some cases, the strategic objec- The 35 dead accounted for about casualties, both directly and indirectly.
tive might still be to destroy the a fourth of the US military mem- In World War I, for example, the 13
enemy’s army and occupy his capi- bers who died in action in that con- million civilian deaths outnumbered
tal, but more often, the desired result flict. That was a higher percentage the 8.5 million military deaths. Dis-
is something else. Keep enemy ar- than the historical norm, around placed persons were hard hit by an
mor from massing. Halt an invasion. two percent, but that is partly be- influenza epidemic that swept the
Take away the enemy’s ability to cause losses to enemy fire were world and took millions of lives. Other
command and control his forces. In- historically low. civilian deaths were caused by star-
hibit his aggression. Friendly fire is often thought of as vation, exposure, and disease.
“With precision targeting and something that aircraft do to ground One of the most famous instances
longer-range systems, commanders troops, but many of these casualties of civilian casualties may have led,
can achieve the necessary destruc- are the result of fire from tanks, ar- in the long run, to fewer civilian
tion or suppression of enemy forces tillery, and other weapons. casualties than if the strike had not
with fewer systems, thereby reduc- In World War II, Korea, and Viet- taken place.
ing the need for time-consuming and nam, 58 percent of the friendly fire About 80,000 Japanese were killed
risky massing of people and equip- casualties were ground to ground, 37 by the atomic bomb dropped on
ment,” the Joint Chiefs of Staff said percent were air to ground, and five Hiroshima Aug. 6, 1945. Japan ada-
in “Joint Vision 2010” in 1996. percent were ground to air. In Desert mantly refused to surrender. If the
More effectiveness. More flexibil- Storm, 61 percent were ground to atomic bomb had not been used, an
ity. Fewer casualties. ground, 36 percent were air to ground, invasion of the Japanese home is-
lands was the only alternative for
bringing the war to an end. The United
States had just taken 48,000 casual-
World War I Military Dead
ties in the battle for Okinawa, where
it was opposed by a Japanese force a
Battle and Nonbattle Deaths
fraction the size of the one waiting
Germany 1,773,700 in the home islands.
The bomb ended the war and al-
Russia 1,700,000
most certainly saved tens of thou-
France 1,357,800 sands of American lives. It is highly
probable—although fiercely de-
Austria–Hungary 1,200,000
bated—that more Japanese would
British Empire 908,371 have died in an invasion than were
killed by the bomb.
Italy 650,000
Sometimes civilian deaths are de-
Romania 335,706 liberate.
The Nazis killed six million Jews
Turkey 325,000
in the Holocaust. Millions of Chi-
United States 116,516 nese died in the brutal Japanese con-
quest of the 1930s and 1940s. Be-
Bulgaria 87,500
tween 1975 and 1979, the Khmer
Serbia 45,000 Rouge killed two million people in
Cambodia. About 800,000 civilians
Others: Belgium, Greece, Japan,
died in the systematic slaughter of
Montenegro, Portugal 29,238
men, women, and children in the
Rwanda Civil War in 1994.
Total 8,528,831 Civilian casualties continue to oc-
cur in wars. In fact, the rate may be
rising in conflicts in the developing
The United States did not enter World War I at the beginning, and its losses were
world.
lower than those of other major combatants.
“The percentage of civilians killed
Source: Encyclopedia Britannica and wounded as a result of hostili-
AIR FORCE Magazine / June 2003 51
ties has risen from five percent of all struck because of the danger to civil- tional press and gathering “data.”
casualties at the turn of the last cen- ians. He calculated that, as of January
tury to 65 percent during World War Despite this, it is the United States 2002, US bombs had killed 4,050
II to 90 percent in more recent con- that attracts the most vehement criti- noncombatants. To arrive at that fig-
flicts,” a relief group, Save the Chil- cism for civilian casualties. Further- ure, he relied on such sources as the
dren, said in a report in 2002. “In the more, the critics nearly always ex- Afghan Islamic Press Agency, the al
last decade alone, more than two aggerate the numbers. Jazeera news network, and newspa-
million children haven been killed That was the case with the Gulf pers in Pakistan.
during wars.” War of 1991. “The radical group A different estimate for the same
The report did not give a breakout, Greenpeace claimed as many as period, by the Project on Defense
but among the places mentioned 15,000 Iraqi civilians died,” John Alternatives, was that between 1,000
were Rwanda, Chechnya, Afghani- Leo wrote in US News & World and 1,300 civilians had been killed.
stan, Angola, Congo, Liberia, Mo- Report. “Saddam Hussein’s govern- The actual number of noncombatant
zambique, Sierra Leone, and Soma- ment said 20,000 to 50,000, and the casualties is not known.
lia. American Friends Service Commit-
tee/Red Crescent went way over- Who’s a Combatant?
Limiting Civilian Casualties board and claimed 300,000 civil- Afghanistan raised again an old
The trend has been exactly oppo- ians died. Accepted estimates are but critical question: Who is a com-
site in US military actions of recent far lower. Human Rights Watch es- batant?
years. The policy is to avoid civilian timated 2,500 to 3,000. A long analy- Yaser Esam Hamdi, born in Loui-
casualties and collateral damage, and sis in Foreign Policy magazine put siana, raised in Saudi Arabia, was
the accuracy of the weapons is good the number of Iraqi civilian dead at captured on a battlefield in Afghani-
enough to make it possible. 1,000.” stan carrying an AK-47. He admit-
Some targeting mistakes are bound Civilian casualties were low in ted that he had trained and deployed
to occur, and the precision guided Kosovo and Serbia, and everybody with the Taliban. His lawyers have
munitions are not perfect. It is not knew it. Investigators for Human been trying to free him from deten-
possible to prevent all unintended Rights Watch put the total at 500. tion on the grounds that he is not an
casualties, but every target is screened Operation Enduring Freedom in enemy combatant. His case has been
for potential civilian casualties. Prob- Afghanistan went to new levels in working its way through the federal
able blast and fragmentation patterns trying to avoid civilian casualties. appeals courts for months.
are considered. The size of the weapon, Central Command was accused in Saddam Hussein and his Iraqi co-
the direction and angle of the attack, news media leaks of being too cau- horts took the question to new lev-
and even the time of day of the strike tious and letting some al Qaeda lead- els.
are chosen to minimize civilian ca- ers get away. Before the war began, Iraq said
sualties. At the same time, Marc W. Herold, that it had trained a million civilians
In some cases, facilities serve both associate professor of economics and in the basics of armed combat and
military and civilian functions, so women’s studies at the University of had given many of them firearms.
decision-makers must weigh the im- New Hampshire, was making his own Advancing US forces encountered
portance of the target against the count of civilians killed by bombing Iraqi troops in civilian clothing, oper-
predicted noncombatant casualties. in Afghanistan. ating out of homes, religious shrines,
In Operation Iraqi Freedom, some Herold spent 12 to 14 hours a day schools, and hospitals. Iraq sent ci-
targets of military value were not on the Internet, reading the interna- vilians, including women, barreling
into checkpoints in suicide attacks.
Iraqi troops fired on American forces
while carrying white flags and pre-
“The CNN Effect”
tending to surrender.
For the first two years of World War II, censors at the Office of War In the first Gulf War, the Iraqis
Information banned the publication of photos of dead American soldiers seized 2,000 foreigners in Kuwait,
or sailors. oil workers, bankers, and others, and
The policy was eased in 1943 to help prepare the public for the held them as human shields at mili-
losses that lay ahead. The first US casualties seen at home were pictures tary bases and industrial plants.
of the dead on a beach in New Guinea in Life Magazine September 1943. This time, the human shields were
“Graphic” images were still forbidden.
volunteers, coming from the United
By the Vietnam era, television had replaced newsreels. The cover-
States, Britain, and elsewhere with
age was not yet live from the battlefield, but videotapes were flown back
the idealistic notion of protecting
to the United States and telecast upon arrival.
hospitals and schools—which were
When Gulf War I began on Jan. 17, 1991, CNN and ABC were
broadcasting live from Baghdad. The coalition air component staff in in no danger, of course—but the Ira-
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, was watching CNN. When it went off the air qis wanted them at locations of mili-
abruptly, they knew the Iraqi International Telecommunications Center tary significance instead. Volunteer
had been taken out. shields assigned to the South Baghdad
Live television coverage of war became the norm. Casualties were Electricity Plant, for example, were
no longer distant and abstract. The impact on public opinion was called chagrined to discover an army base
“the CNN effect.”
adjacent to it.
Central Command said it could
52 AIR FORCE Magazine / June 2003
not guarantee the safety of the hu-
The Terrible Toll of World War II
man shields, but probably took their
presence into account.
Military Deaths Civilian Deaths
It was fairly safe for the human
shields to defy the United States, but due to war
they don’t show up when the Saddam
Husseins of the world are on the Allied Powers
march. USSR 11,000,000 7,000,000
China 1,310,224 10,000,000
“Casualty Aversion” UK/British Commonwealth 373,372 92,673
In the opinions of some, the US Yugoslavia 305,000 1,200,000
armed forces have gone too far in
United States 292,131 6,000
avoiding casualties. That view was
France 213,324 350,000
heard periodically during the 1990s,
Poland 123,178 5,675,000
but it gained steam after the conflict
Greece 88,300 325,000
in Kosovo and Serbia in 1999.
Others: Belgium, Brazil,
Airpower was the only force used
against the Serbs. Ground forces were Czechoslovakia, Denmark,
not engaged and were months away Netherlands, Norway,
from being ready to engage. Philippines 62,643 591,000
“Despite the accuracy of the air Allied Totals 13,768,172 25,239,673
attacks, too many civilians were
killed while allied combatants avoided Axis Powers
risk,” retired Marine Corps Lt. Gen.
Germany 3,500,000 780,000
Bernard E. Trainor wrote in The
Japan 1,300,000 672,000
Boston Globe. “This turns a prin-
Romania 300,000 200,000
ciple of a just war on its head—
Italy 242,232 152,941
specifically, the obligation to pro-
Hungary 200,000 290,000
tect the innocent at the expense of
the warrior. Another troubling and Others: Bulgaria, Finland 92,000 12,000
similar aspect of the so-called ‘im- Axis Totals 5,634,232 2,106,941
maculate’ air campaign is the ability
to drive an enemy to his knees with- Source: Encyclopedia Britannica
out shedding a drop of the bomber’s
blood. Normally, the litmus test of
going to war was the willingness to
suffer casualties in pursuit of its ob- heel as we enter the 21st century.” are supposed to be willing to die, so
jective.” He said the force protection fetish- that civilians do not have to.”
Secretary of Defense William S. ism was “rooted in Vietnam—spe- The merit of these accusations
Cohen and Gen. Henry H. Shelton, cifically in the resultant Weinberger– depends on the eye of the beholder.
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Powell Doctrine.” Do US forces shy away from casual-
added fuel to the fire when they told US combat operations in Afghani- ties in general, or do they avoid un-
the Senate Armed Services Commit- stan were “conducted in a manner necessary casualties?
tee that “the paramount lesson learned consistent with those of casualty pho- The operations in Bosnia, Kosovo,
from Operation Allied Force is that bic Operations Deliberate Force and Afghanistan were concluded
the well-being of our people must (Bosnia) and Allied Force (Kosovo),” successfully and swiftly with low
remain our first priority.” Record said. casualties. Would more risk have
Jeffrey Record, professor of strat- Peter D. Feaver and Christopher been better?
egy, doctrine, and airpower at the Air Gelpi of Duke University called the Gulf War II followed a similar
War College, agreed with Trainor. phenomenon “casualty aversion” and pattern.
“Force protection fetishism was said it is most prevalent among mili- After more than three weeks of
on full display during the Kosovo tary leaders. fighting, US forces were in control
crisis,” Record wrote. He said, “A majority of the American of Baghdad. Their losses included
“Ground-combat options were self- people will accept combat deaths— 116 dead, including deaths attribut-
denied. Airpower was kept at safe so long as the mission has the poten- able to accidents as well as those
altitudes. Clausewitz was stood on tial to be successful,” they main- killed by direct military fire.
his head.” tained. “The public can distinguish There was no feeling of “casualty
In Record’s assessment, “The long- between suffering defeat and suffer- aversion” to it, but, on the other hand,
term effect was to broadcast to friend ing casualties.” it wasn’t the Battle of the Somme,
and foe alike America’s Achilles’s Feaver and Gelpi said, “Troops either. ■
John T. Correll was editor in chief of Air Force Magazine for 18 years and is now a contributing editor. His most recent
article, “The Evolution of the Bush Doctrine,” appeared in the February issue.
AIR FORCE Magazine / June 2003 53