This story was excerpted from Alex Stumpf’s Pirates Beat newsletter. To read the full newsletter, click here . And subscribe to get it regularly in your inbox.
The expectation for the 2025 Pirates is simple.
“We're looking in 2026 to make the playoffs,” team president Travis Williams said. “Period. Full stop.”
Getting there is murkier. The Pirates already have answered the biggest question of the offseason, extending manager Don Kelly and retaining general manager Ben Cherington. But there are still five other questions that need clarity before the first workouts at Pirate City in mid-February.
1. Can the Pirates improve the offense? The Pirates ranked last in baseball in runs, home runs and OPS in 2025. That needs to improve.
The expectation is for hitting coach Matt Hague to return, so the focus is going to be on internal improvement and some external additions. Getting Oneil Cruz back on track and having Bryan Reynolds play like he did in the second half will help, but that’s not going to be enough. There are holes in the outfield and the left side of the infield (even if you pencil in Jared Triolo at one of those latter spots).
2. What is Mitch Keller ’s fate? Keller was one of the biggest trade chips available this past Deadline, but the Pirates opted to keep their veteran right-hander. He has three years remaining on his contract, so they don’t need to trade him. But he’s due to make $16.5 million in 2026. If the Pirates can flip him for a Major League bat and free up money to add through free agency, they have to consider making that deal.
There’s plenty of young pitching on the staff, but Keller adds a steady hand and has made 95 starts over the past three years. Having someone you can rely on for at least five innings every five days is incredibly valuable. While many expect Keller to be traded , the Pirates shouldn’t feel pressured to make a deal if they don’t like it.
3. Does Andrew McCutchen return? McCutchen is one of the most beloved Pirates of all time , and he wants to keep playing in 2026. The question is whether it will be in Pittsburgh. This is the first time when a free-agent departure is a distinct possibility.
“Obviously, a lot of that stuff is out of my control,” McCutchen said after the final home game of the season “So I just need to do my part. I do want to continue playing, so wherever that may be. I’m looking forward to seeing where the offseason takes me. We’ll move on from there. … I’m not necessarily just here to be here.”
McCutchen finished with a career-worst .700 OPS and 95 OPS+ , though his expected stats suggested he might have been unlucky. Does a reunion make sense, or could the two sides part again?
4. Who is the new pitching coach? Pitching was the Pirates’ strength in 2025, but they did not renew pitching coach Oscar Marin’s contract after getting input from the pitching staff and weighing their desire to reach another level. There’s plenty of talent on the pitching side and young players who could be on the ascent, so maximizing that group is going to be imperative.
It will be interesting to see what direction the Pirates take. Do they want to go with someone internal who has a history with those pitchers -- pitching coordinator Josh Hopper and director of pitching development Jeremy Bleich would theoretically be two quality options -- or do they want a new voice from the outside?
5. What direction do they go at catcher? Henry Davis got glowing reviews from his pitchers but continued to struggle at the plate. Joey Bart’s OPS dropped over 100 points (.799 in 2024 to .696). Endy Rodríguez just can’t stay on the field. Rafael Flores made a good first impression in his September cup of coffee, but he’s still an unproven rookie.
The Pirates can carry four catchers on the 40-man roster , especially since Flores and Rodríguez can also play first base, but is that the right call? Are they better suited flipping one in a trade and putting more eggs in fewer baskets, or hedge the bet, use an extra roster spot and hope someone can take the job?