Policy Title
University Advancement Data Confidentiality and Usage Policy
Policy Owner
Vice President for University Advancement
Responsible Office
University Advancement, Advancement Resources and Engagement Programs
Contact Information
Questions concerning this policy or its intent should be directed to the Associate Vice President for Advancement Resources and Engagement Programs in the Division of University Advancement; 412-268-2620.
Pertinent Dates
This policy was approved on August 18, 2016. Administrative changes were made in February 2021, January 2022, March 2023, and September 2024.
Approved By
The President of Carnegie Mellon University.
Entities Affected By This Policy
Carnegie Mellon faculty, staff, and volunteers.
Who Needs To Know About This Policy
This policy governs University Advancement staff and other Carnegie Mellon University employees who use Advancement-managed data. It also applies to volunteers and contractors working on behalf of the university.
Definitions
Confidential information: All alumni, student, parent, friend, organization, donor, and prospect information in any format (database record, email, any other electronic format, hard copy, voicemail, or conversation) and information about employees, including compensation, date of birth, and other personal information that is not considered publishable.
Forms / Instructions
n/a
Related Information
Reason for Policy / Purpose
University Advancement is committed to safeguarding the confidential information of Carnegie Mellon alumni, students, parents, friends, donors, prospects, employees, and other members of the university community. The purpose of this policy is to outline who can access data maintained or stored by Advancement, the steps required to receive that access, and the acceptable use of that data. This policy complements broader university policies related to information security and computing.
University Advancement is committed to safeguarding the confidential information of Carnegie Mellon alumni, students, parents, friends, donors, prospects, employees, and other members of the university community. The purpose of this policy is to outline who can access data maintained or stored by Advancement, the steps required to receive that access, and the acceptable use of that data.
This policy complements broader university policies related to information security and computing.
Abstract
This policy outlines University Advancement (UA) information confidentiality and usage, including access to UA data by university employees and non-employees.
This policy outlines University Advancement (UA) information confidentiality and usage, including access to UA data by university employees and non-employees.