Plastics are synthetic (artificial) or semisynthetic materials, made from large-molecule compounds called polymers , that can be molded or shaped, usually by the application of heat and pressure . [1]
The first commercially successful plastic was invented in the 1860s by American industrialist John Wesley Hyatt . As Encyclopedia Britannica explains, Hyatt was attracted by a reward of $10,000 offered by a New York billiards company in 1863 to anyone who could invent a satisfactory substitute for ivory billiard balls. A substitute substance was desired because the price of ivory was rising and the supply of ivory declining, due to the overhunting of elephants for their precious ivory tusks and the growing popularity of billiards and demand for ivory balls. According to the Science History Institute, “By treating cellulose derived from cotton fiber with camphor, Hyatt discovered a plastic that could be crafted into a variety of shapes and made to imitate natural substances like tortoiseshell, horn, linen, and ivory.” Patented in 1870 and dubbed Celluloid in 1872, the plastic proved a poor fit for billiard balls but worked well for the game pieces in dominoes and checkers and for other practical products. [2] [3]
“For the first time, human manufacturing was not constrained by the limits of nature,” notes the institute. “Nature only supplied so much wood , metal , stone , bone , tusk , and horn . But now humans could create new materials. This development helped not only people but also the environment. Advertisements praised celluloid as the savior of the elephant and the tortoise . Plastics could protect the natural world from the destructive forces of human need.” Furthermore, “the creation of new materials also helped free people from the social and economic constraints imposed by the scarcity of natural resources. Inexpensive celluloid made material wealth more widespread and obtainable.” [2]
Plastics went completely synthetic (artificial) with the invention of Bakelite by American chemist Leo Baekeland in 1907. American plastics manufacturing then surged 300 percent during World War II , thanks to plastic-based inventions that aided the war effort. For example, plexiglass was invented in the 1920s and refined by German chemist Otto Röhm and his company in the early 1930s as a substitute for glass and used for military plane windshields, canopies, and  gun turrets, and nylon was invented by American chemist Wallace Hume Carothers in 1938 as a replacement for silk and widely used for parachutes . Following the war, writes the Science History Institute, plastics offered everyday people “an almost utopian vision of a future with abundant material wealth, thanks to an inexpensive, safe, sanitary substance that could be shaped by humans to their every whim.” [2] [4]
Plastic’s reputation took a hit in the 1960s when plastic debris was first observed collecting in the ocean, whereupon the word “plastic” became synonymous with “fake” and “cheap.” The new environmental and ecology movements also took note of plastic’s inability to biodegrade (decompose). But despite these concerns, the consumer market for single-use plastics skyrocketed in the 1970s. Plastic jugs, for example, replaced the once omnipresent glass milk bottle. [2]
In light of growing environmental concerns, the plastics industry proposed widespread recycling programs. Americans had a history of recycling, mainly out of necessity. Clothes with holes were not discarded but mended and reused, and the “rag-and-bone man” (who collected waste paper, old rags, bones, and scrap metal to sell to wealthy factory-owners) was a fixture in Western societies in the 19th century. During World War I and II , recycling was critical for the manufacturing of the war materiel needed for victory, and governments instituted extensive PR campaigns to spur a habit of reuse. The new recycling movement of the 1970s built on this tradition, as cities and states instituted the now popular curbside recycling programs. [5] [6]
Images of the mounting garbage at municipal landfills, and reports of garbage coming together in the oceans and harming and killing sea animals, further popularized the need for recycling.  In 1997, while returning home after the Los Angeles-to-Hawaii Transpacific sailing race, Captain Charles Moore sailed through the North Pacific Ocean , where he found himself awash in a sea of plastic refuse. Returning the next year, Moore found the mass of plastic had grown. Dubbed the “ Great Pacific Garbage Patch ,” it is now estimated to be twice the size of Texas; it is just one of five areas of plastic accumulation in the oceans. The unceasing growth of these areas highlights in dramatic fashion the environmental problem with plastics and their potential danger to marine life, which can digest the plastics and microplastics and get entangled in the refuge. [2] [7] [99]
However, consumer appetite for plastics has only increased in the 21st century. Since the 1950s over nine billion metric tons of plastic have been produced globally, with more than half manufactured after 2000. [8]
Approximately 50 percent of plastic waste is single-use plastic . Single-use plastics “are goods that are made primarily from fossil fuel-based chemicals (petrochemicals) and are meant to be disposed of right after use—often in mere minutes. Single-use plastics are most commonly used for packaging and service ware, such as bags, bottles, wrappers, and straws,” explains journalist Courtney Lindwall. [8]
The impact of plastic waste on marine life Learn how plastic debris affects the Pacific Ocean. (more)
Unlike more permanent plastic items, such as PVC pipes used for plumbing and electrical wiring, most single-use plastics cannot be reused without potentially damaging consequences. While it’s possible to reuse a single-use plastic grocery bag a few times, “experts say to take caution when it comes to plastic bottles or food containers … [because] all plastics used in food containers and plastic bottles could release harmful chemicals if used repeatedly,” reports journalist Stephanie Vermillion. Even “those [single-use items] said to be free of bisphenol A [BPA]—a controversial chemical that’s been linked to hormonal disruptions”—could be problematic. [9]
The myriad problems with and conveniences of plastic are well established, so the question remains how to balance the one with the other. Some jurisdictions have dealt with this problem by outright banning single-use plastics. In the United States, San Francisco was the first city to ban plastic bags, and many cities and a few states followed the trend. Plastic straws have been banned in cities in some 15 states and Washington, D.C. Other plastic bans are popping up across the country—hotels in California and New York state, for example, are banned from providing tiny plastic bottles of shampoo, conditioner, moisturizer, and body wash. [10] [11] [12] [13] [14]
While no federal ban exists in the United States, the Department of the Interior began phasing out all single-use plastics in national parks and some public lands. Additionally, the Biden administration released “the first comprehensive, government-wide strategy to target plastic pollution at production, processing, use, and disposal.” Called “Mobilizing Federal Action on Plastic Pollution: Progress, Principles, and Priorities,” its goal was “to phase out federal procurement of single-use plastics from food service operations, events, and packaging by 2027, and from all federal operations by 2035.” [10] [40]
On February 7, 2025, President Donald Trump seemed ready to roll back at least some of the phase-out, posting on Truth Social : “I will be signing an Executive Order next week ending the ridiculous Biden push for Paper Straws, which don’t work. BACK TO PLASTIC!” On February 10, Trump signed the executive order “Ending Procurement and Forced Use of Paper Straws,” which ordered federal agencies to phase-out use of paper straws. [41] [97]
Internationally, China banned single-use plastic straws in restaurants and single-use plastic bags in major cities; the European Union banned most single-use plastics as of July 1, 2021; and several other countries have implemented or are considering such bans. [15] [16]
So, are single-use plastic bans the most effective way to reduce plastic consumption and pollution ?
Pro 1: Single-use plastic bans combat destructive convenience culture.
“Our brains favor habits because they conserve energy. So if we are going against the current—a BYO [bring-your-own] straw for example—it’s hard for most people to do so unless highly motivated,” says climate psychology educator and consultant Leslie Davenport. Single-use plastic bans force people to snap out of convenience culture and find better alternatives. [17]
Single-use plastic products promote a culture of convenience wherein cutlery doesn’t need to be washed; no one has to remember to take a bag to the grocery store; you can buy two aspirin in a plastic packet instead of a whole bottle; and food that nature has already “single-use wrapped,” like apples and oranges, is swathed in plastic anyway.
“The worst thing about any single-use item is that we devalue something to the point that we intend to throw it away. The convenience culture has normalized this destructive behavior and as a result, we produce millions of tons of it every single year. If we change our mindset on what we consume, we will be more aware of the single-use plastic we use and how we can avoid it,” argues Megean Weldon of Zero Waste Nerd. [9]
Furthermore, every single-use plastic item has an alternative made of a multi-use material: cotton shopping bags, glass food containers, bamboo cutlery, and metal straws are just a start. Plus, the non-disposable items serve us better. Reusable cups keep liquids hotter or colder longer, for example. And all reusable options are less expensive for the life of the product, use fewer energy resources to make and clean, and have a much lower chance of leaching toxic chemicals. [18] [19] [20]
“I would not recommend plastic, period,” says R. Thomas Zoeller, professor emeritus at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst. [20]
Pro 2: Single-use plastic bans work and generate greater awareness about the dangers of all plastics.
A January 2024 study that examined single-use plastic bag “bans in five states and cities that cover more than 12 million people combined” found those bans to “have cut single-use plastic bag consumption by about 6 billion bags per year. That’s enough bags to circle the earth 42 times.” Similar bans, suggests the study, could reduce single-use plastic bag usage by about 300 plastic bags per person per year on average. [21]
Crowdsourced data from 45,067 volunteer clean ups from 2016 to 2023 showed that in places where plastic bag bans or fees were instituted, the crews collected 25 to 47 percent fewer bags from the shorelines of lakes, rivers, and beaches. [100]
“The bottom line is that plastic bag bans work. Millions … have realized that it’s easy to live without plastic bags and get used to bringing a bag from home or skipping a bag when they can. That means less waste and less litter. For our children to inherit a less polluted earth, that’s exactly what we need,” says Faran Savitz of the PennEnvironment Research & Policy Center. [22]
Bans on single-use plastic bags reduce waste, litter, and pollution, and encourage sustainable alternatives. The logic follows that bans on other single-use products would be as successful. [23]
In fact, bans on plastic straws have also been wildly successful. Journalist Harvin Bhathal explains, “Plastic straw bans are alive and well today, with new proposals still cropping up at the state and city levels. But eliminating plastic straws is no longer the go-to goal of the anti-plastic movement. Part of that is the result of the existing bans’ success: For many consumers, the absence of plastic straws has become normal, even mundane.” [17]
Additionally, there is now a health concern due to our over-reliance on plastics, single-use and otherwise. A study published in Nature Medicine on February 3, 2025, found about seven grams of microplastics and nanoplastics—which are tiny, sometimes microscopic, pieces of plastic that are the result of larger pieces of plastic breaking down—in the brains of human cadavers. For a visual reference, about the same amount of plastic is used to make one of the single-use spoons frequently found with take-out and delivery food orders. The study found a possible correlation between high levels of microplastics in the brain and dementia. Another study found that higher levels of microplastics in the arteries raised the risks of heart attack, stroke, and death. “I have yet to encounter a single human being who says, ‘There’s a bunch of plastic in my brain and I’m totally cool with that,’ ” said researcher Matthew Campen. [98]
Single-use plastic bans, argue advocates, are not meant to solve the world’s plastic problems in one broad stroke. Instead, as Sophie Lewis of Seaside Sustainability notes, the bans are “certainly a start to reducing the amount of future pollution. It is important for people to start to drop their plastic habit, which means decreasing the amount of it in circulation.” [24]
Pro 3: Bans are required because plastic recycling is a myth.
As a 2022 NPR headline declares, “Recycling plastic is practically impossible—and the problem is getting worse.” [25] [27]
Only 5–6 percent of plastic is actually being recycled into new products in the United States, according to Greenpeace. In fact, “no type of single-use plastic food service item (such as those used at fast food restaurants) can legally be claimed as recyclable” in the United States, including clamshell food containers, cutlery, bags, cups, and straws, according to the 2022 U.S. MRF (Material Recovery Facilities) Survey. [25] [26]
The Center for Climate Integrity calls plastic recycling a “fraud” and explains that part of the problem is that plastic, unlike glass or cardboard, is not a single material but is composed of many related polymers that also sometimes include metal, paper, colorants, and other materials. The materials cannot be recycled together and cannot be separated for individual recycling, a catch-22 that lands some 95 percent of plastic in landfills and the ocean, among other inappropriate places for waste. [27]
“Politically it’s easier to just say ‘Gosh, we’re going to take everything and we think we can get it recycled,’ and then look the other way” while the plastic goes to the landfill, “That’s greenwashing [making a product, policy, or activity appear more environmentally friendly or less environmentally damaging than it really is] at its best,” says Trent Carpenter, general manager of Southern Oregon Sanitation. [25]
Leslie Davenport, a climate psychology educator, explains that consumers buy into greenwashing unconsciously, because “there can be an unexamined story of ‘I’m doing my part’ because it is more soothing than feeling out of control with the harmful and terrifying trajectory we are on with climate change.” [17]
At this point, virtually all claims of plastic recyclability are egregiously false. Greenpeace urges “instead of continuing on this false path, companies in the U.S. and around the world must urgently phase out single-use plastics by replacing their packaging with reuse and refill systems and offering packaging free products.” Bans can assist in this effort. [26]
Con 1: Single-use plastics are sanitary, convenient, and efficient and used in important ways, especially in medicine.
From aiding people with disabilities to keeping food fresh, from reducing transportation emissions to aiding in medical treatment, single-use plastics are much more than “convenient.”
People with disabilities rely on single-use plastics for a variety of reasons. Many cannot lift a cup to their mouth and must rely upon a straw that they cannot easily wash; many cannot manage food preparation and need sliced fruit in a plastic container. Alternatives to single-use plastic can be prohibitively expensive and difficult to maintain for those with disabilities. [28]
Why can’t food be packaged in something other than plastic? The simple answer is that plastic keeps food fresh. Emmerson Packaging cites several studies showing that “cucumbers wrapped in plastic last 14 days longer than unwrapped cucumbers; bananas wrapped in plastic last 21 days longer than their unwrapped counterparts; beef wrapped in plastic vacuum packaging with an oxygen barrier film lasts 26 days longer; [and] selling grapes in plastic bags or trays has reduced in-store wastage of grapes by 20 percent.” Keeping food fresh longer not only reduces food waste but also increases the accessibility of healthful foods to “ food deserts .” [29]
Fresh food like produce travels an average of 1,500 miles from farm to grocery store. Plastic packaging ensures the food is not damaged during transport and reduces transportation emissions, because it’s lighter than alternatives. [30] [31] [32] [33]
Additionally, we rarely think beyond food in terms of single-use plastics. However, single-use plastics are crucial in the medical field, from PPE (masks and surgical gowns) to syringes and blood-transfer bags. Single-use plastics keep patients and providers safe by providing them with tools and drugs that are sterile. We can’t ban all single-use plastic without providing accessible, appropriate, and safe alternatives. [34]
Con 2: Single-use plastic bans spawn complacency and mask a greater need—a reduction in all plastic production and use.
The problem is not consumer use of single-use plastic, but the enormous production of all plastic. Single-use plastic bans mask this larger issue, which poses problems for both our environment and our health.
Even with every mitigating policy on the consumer side—bans, recycling, and others—“we would still release more than 17 million tons of plastic per year into nature,” according to Melanie Bergmann, a plastic pollution and microplastic expert at the Alfred Wegener Institute in Germany. Bergmann says, “The science is crystal clear. Only upstream measures such as a cap on plastic production will prevent further degradation of our life-supporting ecosystems and allow us at the same time to reduce the carbon footprint of plastics, which makes up 4.5 percent of the global CO₂ emissions.” [35]
In perspective, CO₂ emissions from plastic production are expected to outpace the poster child of climate pollution—coal—by 2030. Thus, dealing with single-use plastic waste is only a bandage on the larger problem of plastic production. [35]
While a world without any plastic is farfetched, “it is crucial that the production of new plastics is reduced and refined. The types of plastics currently being produced are incredibly complex, and often not used in an easily recyclable form. The world urgently needs to reduce the types of plastic from the thousands currently available to perhaps 10–20 key polymer types which can be easily identified, sorted and recycled,” according to British think-tank Chatham House. [36]
The recent discovery of plastic in our brains, and the possible health implications from this development—perhaps contributing to dementia and higher risks of heart attack, stroke, and death—merely accentuates the greater need for rethinking our entire association with plastic. Single-issue bans spawn complacency and discourage the public from dealing with this larger issue. [98]
The United States alone throws out 42 million metric tons of plastic. The solution is to stop producing new plastic. Policies such as requiring all plastic to be 50 percent recycled rather than 100 percent “virgin” plastic, and requiring environmental impact reviews for production expansion, will go much farther than consumer bans, which distract from the larger, critical problem at hand. [37]
Con 3: Bans wrongly punish consumers, whereas producers and recyclers are the problem.
Society has been led to believe that if plastic products are used and disposed of appropriately, they will be recycled. Why punish consumers who have followed directions? The plastics industry and recycling companies need to step up their game and deliver what they promised by both manufacturing recyclable plastics and actually recycling them.
“Plastic is a victim of its own success: cheap, light and flexible. It’s so cheap that many of us don’t question using it once and throwing it away. It’s so useful that we find it everywhere. While plastic waste is a pressing problem, its properties mean that it still has an important part to play, particularly in transporting food. So before we give up on plastic, perhaps we should think about how to use, and reuse, it better,” says journalist Axelle Parriaux. [31]
The idea that recycling is a subcategory of “sustainable polymer engineering” has emerged, moving responsibility from consumers, 94 percent of whom support recycling, to manufacturers. [38] [39]
Sustainable polymer engineering “includes the development of biodegradable and natural-sourced polymers; the development of refined separation and recycling techniques, including machine-learning enabled recognition and separation of components; and the development of ‘chemical breakdown and re-use’ strategies,” according to American Recycler . [38]
Michael Bockstaller, a professor at Carnegie Mellon University, explains that the idea of “chemical breakdown and re-use” is to reverse-engineer polymers, to revert the polymer back into its monomer form,” which allows different plastics and other components to be separated. Bockstaller’s researchers are also looking into “polymers that can ‘heal’ themselves. The idea is to design materials that can recover their structure and properties after damage events—thus reducing the amount of material that is discarded due to malfunction.” [38]
Science is ready and capable of developing not only new ways to reduce, reuse, and recycle existing plastics but also innovative ways to produce plastic that is both more durable and more easily recycled.