Table of Contents Ask the Chatbot
Some 25.3 million non-elderly Americans did not have health insurance in 2023, a decline from 28.9 million uninsured Americans in 2019. The largest group of Americans, 154 million non-elderly people, were covered by employer-sponsored health insurance. Less than 1 percent of Americans over 65 were uninsured, thanks to Medicare , a government provided insurance for people over 65 years old. [162] [163]
According to the Commonwealth Fund’s health survey, reported in 2023, the United States among “high-income countries” has “the lowest life expectancy at birth, the highest death rates for avoidable or treatable conditions, the highest maternal and infant mortality , and among the highest suicide rates.” The country also has the highest rate of people with multiple chronic conditions and an obesity rate nearly twice the average of other high-income countries. Given these medical challenges, it is not surprising that health care spending has remained far higher in the U.S. than in other high-income countries. “Yet the U.S. is the only [high-income] country that doesn’t have universal health coverage.” [171] [178]
Instead, health care in the United States is largely a private system, through employer-sponsored plans from private insurance companies; it is not a public, universal system. The U.S. does offer universal health care through special programs for certain segments of the population with special needs, such as Medicare for seniors age 65 or older, Medicaid for low-income individuals under age 65, and TRICARE for past and present military members and their families. For this reason, U.S. health care, though fundamentally a private affair, is often called a mixed system. [171] [178] [184]
What Is Universal Healthcare?
Universal health care is an umbrella term for “a system that provides medical services to all people. The government offers it to everyone regardless of their ability to pay, and largely funds it through taxes,” according to economic expert Kimberly Amadeo. [178]
Single-payer health care is one type of universal health care in which the “government provides free health care paid for with revenue from income taxes.… Every citizen has the same access to care”; service providers may be public or private health care facilities, but the care is free at the point of service. Contrary to a multipayer system, in which various entities—such as employers, individuals, or private insurance companies—can pay for the health care, a “single-payer” system is so-called because only one entity (the federal government) pays for the health services; a single-payer system eliminates the role of private insurance companies and replaces them with government-funded services. The United Kingdom, Spain, New Zealand, and Cuba have single-payer systems. In the U.S., military personnel and veterans have access to a single-payer system via the armed services and the Department of Veterans Affairs. [178] [225] [226]
Social health insurance is also a kind of universal health care in which “everyone [is required] to buy insurance, usually through their employers. Employers deduct taxes from employee payrolls to cover the costs, and the taxes go into a government-run health insurance fund that covers everyone. Private doctors and hospitals provide services. The government controls health insurance prices.” Germany, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, Japan, and Switzerland use the social health insurance model. Obamacare was originally modeled on social health insurance, however the program has changed. [178]
National health insurance is yet another kind of universal health care, one that “uses public insurance to pay for private-practice care. Every citizen pays into the national insurance plan. Administrative costs are lower because there is one insurance company. The government also has a lot of leverage to force medical costs down.” Canada, Taiwan, and South Korea all have national health insurance. In the U.S., Medicare , Medicaid , and TRICARE function similarly. [178] [184]
Countries with universal healthcare include but are not limited to Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, England, France, Germany, India, Israel, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Singapore, Sweden, Switzerland, and Taiwan. [178] [179]
A December 29, 2024, Gallup poll found that 62 percent of Americans believed that it is the U.S. government’s responsibility to “ensure all Americans have healthcare coverage,” compared to 36 percent who do not believe health care coverage is the federal government’s responsibility. Americans are split—46 percent to 49 percent respectively—on whether that healthcare should be a national, government-run system or a private insurance system. [224]
Health Care Spending
U.S. health care spending rose 2.7 percent in 2021 to a total of $4.3 trillion nationally and accounted for 18.3 percent of the U.S. Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Of the $4.3 trillion, health insurance paid 71 percent (with private insurance paying 28 percent, and government programs covering the rest via Medicare, Medicaid, and other programs), patients paid 10 percent as did other third party payers (such as the Indian Health Service), investment covered 5 percent, and government public health activities accounted for 4 percent. Per person, health care costs averaged $12,914. [164] [165] [166]
56 percent of Americans were worried about “paying medical costs for serious illness or accident” in 2022. As a financial worry, it was only topped by the worry of “not having enough money for retirement.” Additionally, 43 percent were worried about “paying medical costs for normal healthcare,” which was the fourth most prevalent financial worry in 2022. Meanwhile, 20 percent of American adults reported “major, unexpected medical expenses” with an average cost of $1,000 to $1,999 between May 2021 and May 2022. [167] [168]
In 2022, 41 percent of American adults, about 100 million people, were in medical debt. Over 50 percent of American adults reported going into debt because of medical (or dental) bills. 25 percent of those with medical debt owe more than $5,000 and about 20 percent don’t believe they will ever be able to pay off the debt. [169]
A March 2025 Gallup poll found 12 percent of American adults (about 31 million people) borrowed an estimated $74 billion collectively to cover medical costs in 2024. [223]
People in medical debt cut spending on basics like food and clothing (63 percent), exhausted their savings (48 percent), had to take on extra work (40 percent), delayed a home purchase or their education (28 percent), asked for help from a charity (24 percent), and/or changed their living situation (19 percent). And, 17 percent of those in medical debt filed bankruptcy or lost their home as a result. A 2019 study found that of people who file for bankruptcy, about 67 percent file due to medical debt, with about 530,000 families in the United States filing for bankruptcy annually because of medical debt. [169] [170]
Health Care in a Global Context
The World Health Organization ranked the U.S. health care system at 37 out of its 191 member countries, between Costa Rica and Slovenia, in a landmark 2000 report. [108]
In 2005 the United States and the other member states of the World Health Organization signed the World Health Assembly resolution 58.33, which stated that nations should “transition to universal coverage of their citizens… with a view to sharing risk among the population and avoiding catastrophic health-care expenditure and impoverishment of individuals as a result of seeking care.” [16] [107]
The Commonwealth Fund ranked the United States last in overall health care among 11 high-income countries based on access to care, care process, administrative efficiency, equity, and health care outcomes. Norway, the Netherlands, and Australia were the top three countries. [172]
The United States spends $11,912 per person on health care, the most of any OECD country. Germany follows the U.S. with $7,382 per person, while South Korea spent the least at $3,914 per person. [173]
A January 31, 2023, Commonwealth Fund report found that the United States “spends nearly 18 percent of GDP on health care, yet Americans die younger and are less healthy than residents of other high-income countries” and “[n]ot only does the U.S. have the lowest life expectancy among high-income countries, but it also has the highest rates of avoidable deaths.” According to the report, the U.S. spends much more than the other 37 OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; members are countries generally considered “high-income” or “developed”) countries, per person and as a percentage of GDP, and is the only OECD country that does not have universal health care. [171]
Further, the U.S. has the highest maternal and infant mortality rates, among the highest suicide rate, the highest rate of patients with multiple chronic illnesses, and the highest obesity rate. And yet the U.S. also has one of the lowest levels of doctors and hospital beds, and Americans are least likely to visit a doctor. The Commonwealth Fund concluded, “Not only is the U.S. the only country we studied that does not have universal health coverage, but its health system can seem designed to discourage people from using services.” [171]
Historic Debate on Universal Health Care
Throughout the 18th and 19th century the US federal government did not finance or otherwise provide health care to the public. In the early 20th century, a debate over universal health care began to emerge. In 1915 the American Association for Labor Legislation drafted a series of bills to provide state medical benefits to low income workers. In 1920 the New York State Commissioner of Health, Hermann Biggs, began promoting public health services at the county level, and Charles-Edward Amory Winslow, the Chair of the Department of Public Health at Yale University, wrote: “I look to see our health departments in the coming years… enable every citizen to realize his birthright of health and longevity.” That same year the American Medical Association ‘s House of Delegates passed a resolution officially opposing compulsory health insurance in the United States, with one group of delegates from Illinois calling it a “dangerous bolshevik” scheme. [5] [6] [7] [38]
Government-funded health insurance was considered by President Franklin D. Roosevelt’s Committee on Economic Security, but it was not included as part of the 1935 Social Security Act , in part due to opposition from the American Medical Association. In 1938, health care reform to provide universal coverage was proposed by Roosevelt as an extension of social security, and U.S. Surgeon General Thomas Parran argued that “equal opportunity for health is a basic American right.” In February 1939, Senator Robert Wagner (D-NY) introduced the National Health Care Act, which would have implemented a national health care system, however, the bill did not gain the necessary support in Congress and died in committee. [5] [6] [7] [33] [41]
In 1945, in another attempt at universal health care, President Harry S. Truman sent a message to Congress asking for a new national health insurance program to be run by the federal government. The voluntary program would have allowed individuals to pay monthly fees in return for coverage of all medical expenses. The program was introduced in Congress as the Social Security Expansion Bill. The bill never passed, in part, due the American Medical Association characterizing it at “ socialized medicine.” Although a national health program for all US citizens was not achieved, proponents of the plan continued to advocate for government-funded health insurance by shifting focus to providing coverage to Americans over the age of 65 and the economically disadvantaged. [8] [106]
By the early 1960s, debate grew over the King-Anderson bill, a precursor to Medicare , that would have extend Social Security to cover the medical bills of Americans over the age of 65. Ronald Reagan , who opposed the bill, warned in a 1961 spoken word record that “one of the traditional methods of imposing statism or socialism on a people has been by way of medicine.” Despite some public opposition, Medicare (the Social Security Act Amendments of 1965) was eventually passed by the House (307-116) and the Senate (77-6), and was signed into law by President Lyndon B. Johnson on July 30, 1965. President Harry Truman (then 81 years old) was enrolled as the first beneficiary, because, in 1945, he was the first president to propose national health insurance. [84] [106] [161]
In 1971, President Richard Nixon laid out a National Health Strategy to reform the health insurance system and move towards universal health care. In a 1972 message to Congress, President Nixon continued to advocate for universal health care, arguing that “reform of our health care system – so that every citizen will be able to get quality health care at reasonable cost regardless of income and regardless of area of residence – remains an item of highest priority on my unfinished agenda for America in the 1970s.” A competing plan by Senator Ted Kennedy , the Health Security Act, sought to implement a universal single-payer federal health insurance plan to be financed through taxes. Despite their efforts, by the end of the Nixon presidency, no health care legislation had reached the President’s desk. [9] [10] [11] [12]
President Clinton brought the issue of national health care back to the forefront. On September 22, 1993, he delivered a speech to Congress stating that the “most urgent priority” of the nation was to provide “every American health security, health care that can never be taken away, health care that is always there.” Three months later the Health Security Act was introduced to move the United States towards the goal of universal coverage by requiring all individuals to obtain health insurance and instituting an employer mandate to provide insurance. The Association of American Physicians and Surgeons (AAPS) called the act “socialist,” and a “forfeiture of our freedom” that would “destroy private insurance.” Simultaneously, other legislators introduced a competing act to create a federally run “single-payer” national health insurance plan. As in the 1970s, none of the plans had enough support to the President’s desk. [11] [13] [14] [15]
In 2003, Representative John Conyers, Jr. (D-MI) introduced the United States National Health Insurance Act (or the Expanded and Improved Medicare for All Act) that would not pass Congress, but would provide the foundation for later bills and presidential campaign promises. [174]
Obamacare and Medicare for All
During an October 7, 2008 election debate, then-Senator Barack Obama stated that health care should be a “right for every American.” In a June 15, 2009 speech as U.S. President delivered to the American Medical Association (AMA), Obama urged Congress to craft legislation that would ensure coverage for all Americans. After intense debate, lawmakers passed the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA), also called the Affordable Care Act (ACA) or Obamacare, which was signed into law on March 23, 2010. According to a 2013 White House estimate, 27 million previously uninsured people would gain coverage under Obamacare. [22] [34] [35] [36] [46]
About 8 percent of Americans remained uninsured in 2022, about 26 million people, the lowest percentage in decades due largely to changes in policy during the COVID-19 (coronavirus) pandemic. By 2023, more than 16 million Americans had health insurance via Obamacare, the highest number since the PPACA was signed in 2010. The 2023 enrollees included about 3.6 million people who were not previously enrolled in Obamacare. As of January 8, 2025, almost 24 million people had health insurance under the PPACA. More than 300 million Americans were covered by health insurance, or about 92 percent according to the U.S. Census. [176] [177] [222]
The PPACA did not institute universal health care, and some members of Congress, including Senator Bernie Sanders (I-VT) and Representative Jim McDermott (D-WA), and organizations, including Physicians for a National Health Program (PNHP) and the American Nurses Association, continued to advocate for the implementation of a “single-payer” health care system in the United States that would guarantee universal health care for all Americans under a federally run health insurance plan. [27] [28] [39] [40]
On September 13, 2017, Senator Sanders introduced a Medicare for All bill that would have created a single-payer health care system in the United States. His bill, which had been introduced previously without any co-sponsors, drew at least 15 Senate co-sponsors. However, the plan did not pass Congress. [116]
Medicare for All became a hot button topic in the 2020 presidential election. Only the Green Party candidate, Howie Hawkins, supported the plan, while Joe Biden (D), Donald Trump (R), and Libertarian candidate Jo Jorgensen did not.
Public Opinion
Gallup has asked Americans whether the government should ensure health care since 2000. The first year (2000), 59 percent agreed that the government should ensure health care. Support hit a low in 2013, when 43 percent agreed, but support rebounded and, by 2022, 57 percent supported government ensured heath care. 53 percent were partial to a private insurance based system, while 43 percent were partial to a government-run system. [175]
The partisan divide is stark, however: 88 percent of Democrats and 59 percent of Independents agreed that “it is the responsibility of the federal government to make sure all Americans have healthcare coverage,” while only 28 percent of Republicans agreed. Further, 72 percent of Democrats, 46 percent of Independents, and 13 percent of Republicans support a government-run health care system. [175]
Pros and Cons at a Glance
PROS
CONS
Pro 1: The U.S. already has universal health care for some. The government should expand the system to protect everyone. Read More.
Con 1: Universal health care would be marred by government inefficiency and ignore the realities of the country and free market. Read More.
Pro 2: Universal health care would lower costs and prevent medical bankruptcy. Read More.
Con 2: Universal health care would raise costs for the federal government and taxpayers alike. Read More.
Pro 3: Universal health care would improve individual and national health outcomes. Read More.
Con 3: Universal health care would increase wait times for basic care and worsen Americans’ ill-health. Read More.
Pro 1: The U.S. already has universal health care for some. The government should expand the system to protect everyone.
A national health insurance is a universal health care that “uses public insurance to pay for private-practice care. Every citizen pays into the national insurance plan. Administrative costs are lower because there is one insurance company. The government also has a lot of leverage to force medical costs down,” according to economic expert Kimberly Amadeo. Canada, Taiwan, and South Korea all have national health insurance. In the United States, Medicare, Medicaid, and TRICARE function similarly. [178]
Medicare is the “federal health insurance program for: people who are 65 or older, certain younger people with disabilities, [and] people with End-Stage Renal Disease (permanent kidney failure requiring dialysis or a transplant, sometimes called ESRD).” Patients pay a monthly premium for Medicare Part B (general health coverage). The 2023 standard Part B monthly premium is $164.90. Patients also contribute to drug costs via Medicare Part D. Most people do not pay a premium for Medicare Part A (“inpatient hospital stays, care in a skilled nursing facility, hospice care, and some home health care”). More than 65.3 million people were enrolled in Medicare according to February 2023 government data. [180] [181]
Medicaid “provides health coverage to millions of Americans, including eligible low-income adults, children, pregnant women, elderly adults and people with disabilities. Medicaid is administered by states, according to federal requirements. The program is funded jointly by states and the federal government.” More than 84.8 million people were enrolled in Medicaid as of November 2022. [181] [182] [186]
If the government can successfully provide universal health care for 36 percent to almost 50 percent of the population, then the government can provide universal health care for the rest of the population who are just as in need and deserving of leading healthy lives.
Pro 2: Universal health care would lower costs and prevent medical bankruptcy.
A June 2022 study found the United States could have saved $105.6 billion in COVID-19 (coronavirus) hospitalization costs with single-payer universal health care during the pandemic. That potential savings is on top of the estimated $438 billion the researchers estimated could be saved annually with universal health care in a non-pandemic year. [198]
“Taking into account both the costs of coverage expansion and the savings that would be achieved through the Medicare for All Act, we calculate that a single-payer, universal health-care system is likely to lead to a 13 percent savings in national health-care expenditure, equivalent to more than US$450 billion annually (based on the value of the US$ in 2017). The entire system could be funded with less financial outlay than is incurred by employers and households paying for health-care premiums combined with existing government allocations. This shift to single-payer health care would provide the greatest relief to lower-income households,” conclude researchers from the Yale School of Public Health and colleagues. [201]
According to the National Bankruptcy Forum, medical debt is the number one reason people file for bankruptcy in the United States. In 2017, about 33 percent of all Americans with medical bills reported that they “were unable to pay for basic necessities like food, heat, or housing.” If all Americans were provided health care under a single-payer system medical bankruptcy would no longer exist, because the government, not private citizens, would pay all medical bills. [131]
Further, prescription drug costs would drop between 4 percent and 31 percent, according to five cost estimates gathered by New York Times reporters. 24 percent of people taking prescription drugs reported difficulty affording the drugs, according to a Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF) poll. 58 percent of people whose drugs cost more than $100 a month, 49 percent of people in fair or poor health, 35 percent of those with annual incomes of less than $40,000, and 35 percent of those taking four or more drugs monthly all reported affordability issues. [197] [199] [200]
Additionally, 30 percent of people aged 50 to 64 reported cost issues because they generally take more drugs than younger people but are not old enough to qualify for Medicare drug benefits. With 79 percent of Americans saying prescription drug costs are “unreasonable,” and 70 percent reporting lowering prescription drug costs as their highest healthcare priority, lowering the cost of prescription drugs would lead to more drug-compliance and lives not only bettered, but saved as a result. [197] [199] [200]
Pro 3: Universal health care would improve individual and national health outcomes.
Since 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic has underscored the public health, economic and moral repercussions of widespread dependence on employer-sponsored insurance, the most common source of coverage for working-age Americans…. Business closures and restrictions led to unemployment for more than 9 million individuals following the emergence of COVID-19. Consequently, many Americans lost their healthcare precisely at a time when COVID-19 sharply heightened the need for medical services,” argue researchers from the Yale School of Public Health and colleagues. The researchers estimated more than 131,000 COVID-19 (coronavirus) deaths and almost 78,000 non-COVID-19 deaths could have been prevented with universal health care in 2020 alone. [198]
Another study finds a change to “single-payer health care would… save more than 68,000 lives and 1.73 million life-years every year compared with the status quo.” [201]
Meanwhile, more people would be able to access much-needed health care. A January 2021 study concludes that universal health care would increase outpatient visits by 7 percent to 10 percent and hospital visits by 0 percent to 3 percent, which are modest increases when compared to saved and lengthened lives. [202]
Other studies find that universal health coverage is linked to longer life expectancy, lower child mortality rates, higher smoking cessation rates, lower depression rates, and a higher general sense of well-being, with more people reporting being in “excellent health.” Further, universal health care leads to appropriate use of health care facilities, including lower rates of emergency room visits for non-emergencies and a higher use of preventative doctors’ visits to manage chronic conditions. [203] [204] [205]
An American Hospital Association report argues, the “high rate of uninsured [patients] puts stress on the broader health care system. People without insurance put off needed care and rely more heavily on hospital emergency departments, resulting in scarce resources being directed to treat conditions that often could have been prevented or managed in a lower-cost setting. Being uninsured also has serious financial implications for individuals, communities and the health care system.” [205]