Student loan debt is frequently in the news as politicians debate solutions to the rising costs of college that lead to sometimes crippling amounts of debt. For those with outstanding student loans, such debt can be discharged in two ways: forgiveness and bankruptcy .
As of January 2024, Americans owed a collective $1.77 trillion in student loan debt, with $1.64 trillion of that being federal student loans to about 42.7 million total federal student loan borrowers. About four million federal student loan borrowers were in default (270 or more days late). By comparison, in December 2010, Americans owed about $845 billion in student loan debt. By all indications, this debt, and the late payments and defaults as well, will continue to rise as college costs outpace average incomes. [2] [60]
Some have proposed that the U.S. government forgive some or all existing student loan debt in order to relieve the financial pressure on individuals and the country. Student debt forgiveness proposals range from a discharge of $10,000 per borrower (which would forgive the entire debt bills held by about 15 million borrowers) to $50,000 per borrower (which would forgive the entire debt bills held by about 36 million borrowers) to plans that would forgive all outstanding student loan debt. Each plan would include forgiveness for those with late or in-default accounts, as well as partial debt forgiveness for many more borrowers. [8]
The Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania estimated that, depending on details, over ten years, college debt cancellation will cost between $300 billion for a one-time cancellation of $10,000 for borrowers earning under $125,000 per year and $980 billion for a one-time cancellation of $50,000 per borrower. [43]
Others have proposed making student loan debt easier to discharge through bankruptcy . Credit card debt, medical bills, auto loans, and even gambling debt can be canceled by declaring bankruptcy, but, because of a 1976 federal law, discharging student loan debt is much more difficult. Private student loans have also been protected from discharge, by the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005. According to the U.S. Department of Education , people who declare Chapter 7 or Chapter 13 bankruptcy can have student loan debt canceled only if a court finds there is evidence of “undue hardship.” Getting student loans discharged is so difficult and rare, however, that many lawyers advise clients not to try: less than 0.5 percent of students clear their debts through bankruptcy. [9] [10] [11] [12] [13]
In March 2020, at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, President Trump paused federal student loan payments, interest accrual, and debt collection. Congress voted to keep the pause through Sept. 30, 2021, and Trump extended it again through January 2021. President Joe Biden maintained the pause with several renewals after taking office, through December 31, 2022. While some disagree with the continuation of payment, interest, and collection pauses, others question why federal student loan debt can’t be canceled if the federal government can do without payments for almost three years. [41]
On August 24, 2022, President Biden announced a cancellation of “up to $20,000 of federal student loan debt for Pell Grant recipients, and up to $10,000 for other qualifying borrowers.” The White House stated that about 43 million borrowers would qualify for the cancellation, and 20 million borrowers would qualify to have their debt completely canceled. The debt cancellation program, mired in lawsuits since its announcement, was stayed until, on June 30, 2023, the U.S. Supreme Court struck down the student loan program in a 6–3 vote, under the premise that federal law does not permit the U.S. Department of Education to cancel such student loans. [42] [48] [49] [50]
As a result of the invalidation of the mass cancellation program, the Biden administration has canceled student loan debt for several smaller groups, including students taken advantage of by “predatory” institutions. The administration had forgiven about $180 billion in student loan debt for nearly 5 million Americans as of December 20, 2024 [54]
On March 7, 2025, President Trump signed an executive order—”Restoring Public Service Loan Forgiveness”—in which he directed the Secretary of Education to “propose revisions” to the public service loan forgiveness program to “ensure the definition of ‘public service’ excludes organizations that engage in activities that have a substantial illegal purpose.” The order “appears to target groups supporting undocumented immigrants, diversity initiatives or gender-affirming care for children, among others,” according to journalist Stacy Cowley. [55] [56] [57] [58]
In 2025, Republican legislators added a “risk-sharing” plan to the budget reconcilliation bill (also called the “Big Beautitiful Bill” by Republicans and President Trump). According to NPR’s Cory Turner, the caveat would work “to penalize colleges and universities whose students leave with mountains of student loan debt but not nearly the earnings boost to pay it off – and to reward schools that do the opposite.” Colleges and universities would be responsible for paying a portion of a student’s loan debt that is not repaid by the student, however the plan does not include loans that are in default. If passed, the plan is estimated to save the federal government over $6 billion over 10 years. [59]
Pro 1: Student loan debt is slowing the national economy. Forgiveness would boost the economy, benefiting everyone.
Student loan debt slows new business growth and quashes consumer spending. A Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia study finds “a significant and economically meaningful negative correlation” between student loan debt and the falling rate of new small businesses. Such debt can make getting a business (or any other) loan difficult, so people with student loan debt are less likely to be able to open businesses. And the effects snowball from there: fewer small businesses means fewer jobs and less economic output and consumer spending, which in turn means lower national income and slow economic growth for the country. [14] [15] [15]
As William Foster, a vice president and senior credit officer at the financial services company Moody’s, explains, “U.S. real GDP could be boosted on average by $86 billion to $108 billion per year, [which is] quite a bit.…That’s if you had total loan forgiveness.” Though Foster stated total forgiveness isn’t necessary to see a positive impact. [16]
President Biden, when announcing his loan cancellation program, stated, “I ran for office to grow the economy from the bottom up and the middle out because when we do that, everyone does better, everybody does well. The wealthy do very well, the poor have a way up, and the middle class can have breathing room. And that’s going to help America win the economic competition of the 21st century….That’s what today’s announcement is about. It’s about opportunity. It’s about giving people a fair shot. It’s about the one word America can be defined by: possibilities. It’s all about providing possibilities.” [46]
When everyone can’t participate in the economy, the whole economy suffers.
Pro 2: Student loan debt has disproportionately hurt Black students. Forgiveness could help rectify racial inequity.
Black college students borrow more than their white counterparts because of family income, generational wealth, parental education, and the types of colleges attended. [17]
According to Judith Scott-Clayton, senior research scholar with the Community College Research Center at Columbia University, interest rates and graduate school loans leave Black graduates with twice as much debt as white graduates, almost $53,000 four years after graduation. Scott-Clayton also notes that Black graduates default on student loans at a rate of 21 percent, while white graduates default at 4 percent. The disparity, she explains, occurs because most Black students who default have attended predatory for-profit colleges, which have overall higher default rates for all students. [17]
Ashley Harrington, federal advocacy director and senior counsel at the Center for Responsible Lending, explains the catch-22 in which students of color often find themselves: “The student debt crisis is absolutely a racial justice issue. For brown and Black folks, they often need to get more education to get the same salaries and positions that white folks can get with less education and that means how do they do that? They have to take on more debt.…[The debt is then] preventing wealth building. This is something that is impacting not just individuals, it’s impacting their families, their communities.” [18]
An August 2020 Roosevelt Institute study concludes, “While individual white borrowers at the median stand to gain the most in absolute dollars from student debt cancellation, the relative gains for Black borrowers are much larger, and the greater proportion of Black borrowers means that Black wealth overall would experience more growth as a result. Given the many advantages wealth confers in the contemporary U.S. context, the substantial increase in Black net worth is a very significant positive contribution of student debt cancellation, one with potentially transformative positive impacts for Black families overall.” The help provided by student loan debt forgiveness exceeds simple dollar amounts. [19]
Pro 3: Student loan debt has infantilized a generation or more of Americans, preventing them from achieving milestones such as getting married, buying a house, or saving for retirement.
For women with bachelor’s degrees, each increase in $1,000 of student loan debt decreased the odds of marriage by 2 percent per month in the four years after graduation. [14]
Student loan debt prevented about 400,000 people from buying homes between 2005 and 2014, which accounted for 25 percent of the decrease in home ownership. Every $1,000 increase in student loan debt lowered the home ownership rate by 1.5 percent for those who attended four-year colleges. Furthermore, student loan debtors save half as much for retirement by age 30 as those without debt. [14] [20] [14]
An August 2020 Roosevelt Institute study explains, “The positive effects of an evidence-based student debt cancellation policy for individuals and households extend far beyond the immediate need of removing burdensome debt. The ramifications for financial and personal well-being, credit, job stability and satisfaction, homeownership earlier in the life course, capacity to build wealth for emergencies, human capital investments, family stability, and accumulating wealth can multiply throughout a person’s life.” Choosing to go to college to compete in the job market shouldn’t prevent people from living the American dream. [19]
Pro 4: Denying student loan debtors the benefits of bankruptcy—benefits that other debtors have access to—is unfair.
The U.S. Supreme Court said in 1915 that the benefits of bankruptcy allow debtors to “start afresh free from the obligations and responsibilities.” Famous business leaders from Henry Ford to President Trump have used bankruptcy for a fresh start. [21] [22]
Car loans, credit card charges, medical bills, and even gambling debts can be discharged in bankruptcy; not allowing educational debt to be discharged is unfair. Mark Huelsman, Senior Policy Analyst at Demos, writes, “[I]n a world where most students must borrow for a credential, borrowers should receive the same failsafe protections on these loans as they do on any other consumer loan.” [13] [23]
Students who didn’t understand the consequences of taking out big loans at age 18 or who were misled about future job prospects can be saddled with six-figure debt for decades. [24] [25]
Con 1: Student loan forgiveness is an abuse of the loan system. People must be held responsible for their personal economic choices.
A 2020 survey found that 46 percent of Americans believe student loan forgiveness is unfair to those who have paid off their loans, and 39 percent believe it is unfair to those who did not take out loans. [26]
Matthew Noyes, a columnist at Lone Conservative , who notes the sacrifices he had to make to pay off his $27,000 in student loans, explains, “Taking out a loan is a choice, and personal responsibility shouldn’t be supplanted by taxpayer bailouts. ‘Canceling’ student loans means penalizing people like me for honoring my word and repaying the debt I chose to accept.” [27]
Noyes states that the forgiveness debate is steeped in the idea that “people are entitled to a college education and other peoples’ hard work. It codifies in policy the idea that adults are not responsible for their own actions (i.e., taking on debt). In a free society, I am not entitled to a college education and neither is anyone else.” [27]
Furthermore, less than 20 percent of American adults have student loan debt. Is it fair to offer relief to people who overstretched their financial capabilities to go to college and not to those without student loan debt who may still be struggling financially? [28]
Con 2: Student loan debt forgiveness would disproportionately help rich or more financially secure college graduates.
Constantine Yannelis, professor of finance at the University of Chicago, finds, “Any policy that is a universal loan forgiveness policy or a capped forgiveness policy—say forgiving debt up to $50,000—is going to give most of the dollars in forgiveness to upper-income individuals.…Basically, most of the benefits will end up accruing to upper-income individuals.” [29]
As journalist Emma Ayers adds, “Students from families earning more than $114,000 a year borrow at the same rate as the lowest-income students—and they take out loans nearly twice as large. People with advanced degrees—lawyers, doctors and others—account for 40 percent of all student debt [according to estimates by American Progress]. And the top 25 percent of income-earning households hold almost half of student loan debt.…Student forgiveness would largely be a hand up to the better off.” [30]
Moreover, as Adam Looney, nonresident senior fellow at the Brookings Institute, points out, student loan forgiveness benefits only people who went to college: “More than 90 percent of children from the highest-income families have attended college by age 22 versus 35 percent from the lowest-income families. Workers with bachelor’s degrees earn about $500,000 more over the course of their careers than individuals with high school diplomas That’s why about 34 percent of all student debt is owed by borrowers in the top quartile of the income distribution and only 12 percent owed by the bottom 25 percent. Indeed, the majority of all student debt is owed by borrowers with graduate degrees.” [31]
People who borrowed for master’s degrees and PhDs hold 56 percent of student loan debt, according to Brookings Institute estimates. Holding a masters or doctorate degree is also correlated to higher incomes. People with master’s degrees earn about $2.7 million over a lifetime, more than twice what those with high school diplomas earn ($1.3 million). Ph.D. holders earn $3.3 million more over a lifetime. [32] [33]
Inez Stepman, senior policy analyst at Independent Women’s Forum for Prager University, argues, “The people who staff government bureaucracies, corporate HR departments, and school administrations—the people chiefly responsible for the woke mini-revolutions upending institution after institution [will benefit]. For this managerial class, student loan forgiveness would be great,” but the $300 billion to $1.9 trillion tax burden would be shouldered largely by the working class that didn’t attend college. [45]
Con 3: Discharging student loan debt would be only a temporary bandage for the much larger problem of inflated college costs.
The U.S. already has several student loan forgiveness programs, and yet Americans are still in a student loan debt crisis.
People who work in public service jobs can have their loans forgiven after 120 loan payments. Some teachers can have up to $17,500 forgiven after five years of teaching. Nurses can have up to 60 percent of nursing education loans forgiven, followed by another 25 percent. [8]
Income-driven repayment (IDR) plans are available that allow loans to be forgiven after 20–25 years of income-based payments. Military members can have up to 100 percent of their loans forgiven. Medical doctors and lawyers have multiple options for forgiveness. AmeriCorps service members can have 100 percent of their loans forgiven. [8]
Betsy Mayotte, president and founder of the Institute of Student Loan Advisors, notes, “To me the free or debt-free college proposals hold more weight [than loan forgiveness], as they address the illness itself rather than just the symptoms. Don’t get me wrong—if we could find a way to do both, we should—but reducing the debt consumers have to take out in the first place would be the thing that would have the longer-lasting benefit to the economy.” [15]
The U.S. needs a solution to outsized college costs that cause students to take out loans in the first place, rather than a temporary solution that does nothing to prevent the next generation from accruing similar debt.
Con 4: Student loan discharge via bankruptcy would allow borrowers to abuse the loan system and encourage colleges to increase tuition.
Making it easier to discharge loans would give people an incentive to take out loans with no intention of paying them back, or to borrow more than they need. That in turn could cause them to seek bankruptcy without fully realizing the negative long-term consequences on their credit scores and other aspects of their lives. [34] [35] [36]
New college graduates rarely have significant assets to surrender in bankruptcy, so they have less incentive to avoid bankruptcy. [37]
Student debt elimination through bankruptcy would encourage increased borrowing, and more borrowing leads to higher tuition. Abigail Hall Blanco, assistant professor of economics at the University of Tampa, says, “Loan forgiveness would be one giant subsidy, creating perverse incentives for both schools and students. If schools knew the government would forgive the cost of their students’ education, they’d face no incentive to cut costs to keep tuition down.” [38] [39]