Although the total number of incarcerations in the U.S. has declined in recent years—dropping 21 percent from a peak of 2.3 million imprisoned people in 2008—the country still leads the world in mass imprisonment . According to a March 11, 2025 Prison Policy Initiative study, the country’s multi-tiered system of incarceration held:
nearly 2 million people in 1,566 state prisons, 98 federal prisons, 3,116 local jails, 1,277 juvenile correctional facilities, 133 immigration detention facilities, and 80 Indian country jails, as well as in military prisons, civil commitment centers, state psychiatric hospitals, and prisons in the U.S. territories — at a system-wide cost of at least $182 billion each year. [1] [41] [44]
One of the major innovations in American incarceration has been the rise of private prisons . Prison privatization generally operates in one of three ways: private companies provide services to a government-owned and managed prison, such as building maintenance, food supplies, or vocational training ; private companies manage government-owned facilities; or private companies own and operate the prisons and charge the government to house inmates. [2]
What do you think?
Explore the ProCon debate
In the United States, private prisons have their roots in slavery . Some privately owned prisons held enslaved people while the slave trade continued after the importation of enslaved people was banned in 1807. Recaptured runaways were also imprisoned in private facilities, as were Black people who were born free and then illegally captured and sold into slavery. Many plantations were turned into private prisons from the American Civil War forward; for example, the Angola Plantation became the Louisiana State Penitentiary (nicknamed “Angola” for the African homeland where many of the plantation’s enslaved people came from), the largest maximum-security prison in the country. In 2000 the Vann Plantation in North Carolina was opened as the private minimum-security Rivers Correctional Facility (operated by GEO Group). [2] [3] [4] [5] [6]
In the 19th century inmates in private prisons were commonly used for labor via “convict leasing,” in which the prison owners were paid for the labor of the inmates. According to the Innocence Project, Jim Crow laws after the Civil War ensured that the newly freed Black population was imprisoned at high rates for petty or nonexistent crimes in order to maintain the labor force needed for picking cotton and other labor previously performed by enslaved people. However, the practice of convict leasing extended beyond the American South. California awarded private management contracts for San Quentin State Prison in order to allow the winning bidder leasing rights to the convicts until 1860. Convict leasing faded in the early 20th century as states banned the practice and shifted to forced farming and other labor on the land of the prisons themselves. [2] [3] [7] [8] [9] [10]
What Americans think of now as a private prison is an institution owned by a corporate conglomerate such as CoreCivic, GEO Group, LaSalle Corrections, or Management and Training Corporation. This sort of private prison began operations in 1984, when the prison population was skyrocketing because of the ongoing war on drugs . The first private facility opened in Tennessee, where prison overcrowding became such a problem that a federal judge ordered the state to stop sending convicted criminals to its prisons. The private prisons claimed that, because of new construction designs and electronic surveillance, they could operate more efficiently and less expensively with less staff, a claim later disputed. In 1987 Wackenhut Corrections Corporation (now GEO Group) won a federal contract to also run an immigration detention center, further expanding the focus of private prisons. [11] [12] [13]
In 2016 the federal government announced it would phase out the use of private prisons under the administration of President Barack Obama , but this policy was rescinded by President Donald Trump and then reinstated by President Joe Biden . In accordance with the latter’s executive order on “Reforming Our Incarceration Systems to Eliminate the Use of Privately Operated Criminal Detention Facilities,” the Bureau of Prisons (BOP; the U.S. federal system) ended all contracts with privately managed prisons in January 2021; its last contract with a private prison, McRae Correctional Facility in McRae, Georgia, ended on November 30, 2022. As of September 2024 none of the existing 144,459 federal inmates were being held in private facilities. However, undocumented immigrants and others were held in private prisons. Regardless, on January 20, 2025, on day one of Trump’s second term as president, Trump rescinded Biden’s ban on federal contracts with private prisons in an executive order titled Initial Rescissions of Harmful Executive Orders and Actions . [11] [12] [14] [39] [40]
Private prisons have continued to be used at the state level. According to the Sentencing Project, 27 states used private prisons in 2022, and 23 states did not. Montana incarcerated half of its prison population in private facilities. [36] [38]
As of March 2025, eight percent of incarcerated people were being held in private prisons:
14,000 people were being held for local jails
14,000 people were being held for local jails
6,000 were being held for youth detention systems
6,000 were being held for youth detention systems
34,000 were being held for U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) and the Office of Refugee Resettlement
34,000 were being held for U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) and the Office of Refugee Resettlement
19,000 were being held for the Bureau of Prisons and the U.S. Marshals Service
19,000 were being held for the Bureau of Prisons and the U.S. Marshals Service
81,000 were being held for state prison systems [41]
81,000 were being held for state prison systems
So, should prisons be privatized? Explore the debate below.
Pro 1: Privatizing prisons can reduce prison overpopulation, making the facilities safer for inmates and employees.
Overpopulation is “correlated with increased violence, lack of adequate health care, limited programming and educational opportunities, and reduced visitation,” according to Emily Widra, staff member at the Prison Policy Initiative. During the COVID-19 pandemic, the risks were even greater, as the infection rates were higher in prisons operating at 94 percent to 102 percent capacity than in those operating at 84 percent capacity. [15]
In 2020, the most recent year of available data, nine state prison systems were operating at 100 percent capacity or above. Montana’s was the highest, with 121 percent. Another nine state systems were operating at 90 percent to 99 percent capacity or above. The BOP was operating at 103 percent capacity. [15]
“As governments at every level continue to face financial pressures and challenges delivering basic services, contracting [with private companies] provides a tool that enables corrections agencies to better manage costs, while also delivering better outcomes,” says Austill Stuart, director of privatization and government reform at the Reason Foundation. “Performance-based contracts for private prisons, especially contracts tied to reducing recidivism rates, have the possibility of delivering significant improvements that, over the long-term, reduce the overall prison population and help those who are released from jail stay out for good.”. [16]
Private prisons can offer overcrowded, underfunded, and overburdened government prisons an alternative by simply removing prisoners from overpopulated facilities, and as the prison population decreases, so too will the dangers correlated with overcrowding.
Pro 2: Private prisons can transform the broken government-run prison system.
“Private prisons are a tool, and like all tools, you can use them well or use them poorly,” says Adrian Moore, vice president of policy at the Reason Foundation. [17]
Examples of using private prisons well are found in Australia and New Zealand, where private prisons have performance-based contracts with the government. According to the Brennan Center’s Lauren-Brooke Eisen, the prisons earn “bonuses for doing better than government prisons at cutting recidivism. They get an even bigger bonus if they beat the government at reducing recidivism among their indigenous populations. And prison companies are charged for what the government deems as unacceptable events like riots, escapes and unnatural deaths.” [18]
By implementing these kinds of contracts, “the private sector was responsible for designing the solution that would achieve the desired social outcome,” explains the Beeck Center for Social Impact and Innovation at Georgetown University. [19]
“The prison is designed for rehabilitation. The strength of these public-private partnerships is that they bring the best practices and innovation from all over the world, allowing local authorities to benefit not only from private capital but also from the best people and best practices from other countries,” says Oliver Brousse, chief executive of the John Laing Investment Group, which built a prison in New Zealand on the basis of such contracts. [18]
Pro 3: Private prisons offer innovative programs to lower the rates of re-imprisonment.
Recidivism is the tendency of those who have committed a criminal act to commit another criminal act, likely landing inmates back in prison.
GEO Group, Inc., the American private prison conglomerate, offers individual treatment plans, drug abuse education and treatment, adult education GED (general education) courses, life skills courses, parenting and family reintegration, anger management, and work readiness vocational skills. The programs are offered as in-custody, residential, and nonresidential options, allowing people access to the programs while in prison, out on parole or probation, or post-prison while reintegrating into their communities. [20] 0]
“If we want to establish a prison that focuses on rehabilitation and reintegration, we have to give the private sector the space to innovate. If we don’t give them the opportunity to do things differently, we will just get back what we already have,” argues Rachael Cole, former public-private partnership integration director for the New Zealand Department of Corrections. [18]
A New Zealand prison operated by Serco, a British company, has men make their own meals, do their own laundry, schedule their own family and medical appointments, and maintain a résumé to apply for facility jobs. The prison also responds to the job market—for example, opening cafés to train the men as baristas. Another prison in New Zealand includes a cultural center for Maori inmates, designed to reduce recidivism among Indigenous populations. [18] [21]
Programs that focus on inmate reentry into society and deal with drug abuse and other problems can lower recidivism rates, which in turn can reduce prison populations and lessen overcrowding and related dangers.
Con 1: Private prisons exploit employees and prisoners for corporate gain.
Private prisons paid staff $0.38 less per hour than public prisons—$14,901 less in yearly salaries—and required 58 fewer hours of training prior to service than public prisons, leaving staff members less prepared to do their jobs, which contributed to a 43 percent turnover rate, as compared to 15 percent for public prisons. Several private prisons have been fined for understaffing and leaving too few guards for maintaining order in the facilities. [22] [23]
Ivette Feliciano, PBS NewsHour Weekend producer and reporter, explained that a report from Michael Horowitz, the U.S. Justice Department’s inspector general, found that “per capita, privately-run facilities had more contraband smuggled in, more lockdowns and uses of force by correctional officers, more assaults, both by inmates on other inmates and by inmates of correctional officers, more complaints about medical care, staff, food, and conditions of confinement, and two facilities were housing inmates in solitary confinement to free up bed space. The findings also highlighted chronic understaffing as the root of many problems.” [24]
Housing and feeding each prisoner costs about $60 per day, resulting in $1.9 to $10.6 million in gains for accommodating new prisoners in private prisons. And, when private prisons are used, sentences are longer. [25] [26]
Moreover, private companies may charge inflated prices for basic necessities, such as soap and underwear. Prisoner communications, including phone calls and emails, also come at a steep price, forcing inmates to work for pennies ($1.09 to $2.75 per day in private prisons or $0.99 to $3.13 in public prisons) or to rely on family members to pay hundreds of dollars a month. [22] [27]
Furthermore, a 2025 report from FWD.us found that imprisonment costs the families of prisoners about $350 billion each year, or about $4,000 per prisoner for food and other necessities as well as phone calls. [42] [43]
Con 2: Privatizing prisons is costly and leaves the most expensive inmates to public prisons.
A 2019 study of prisons in Georgia found that state prisons cost approximately $44.56 per inmate per day, whereas private prisons cost about $49.07. [28]
The cost to incarcerate a prisoner for one year in a private prison was about $45,000, according to a 2014 study, while the cost in a public prison was $50,000. The $5,000 in savings is deceptive, however, because inmates in private prisons serve longer sentences, negating at least half of the savings, and recidivism rates are largely the same as in public prisons, further negating any savings. [29]
In Arizona a 2011 audit found that medium-security state inmates cost 8.7 percent less per day (between $1,679 and $2,834 per inmate) than those at private prisons. Even a 1999 meta-study of prisons concluded that “private prisons were no more cost-effective than public prisons.” [30] [31]
The lack of per-prisoner savings is striking when one considers that most private prisons house only minimum- and medium-security prisoners, who are less expensive to incarcerate than death-row inmates, maximum-security inmates, or those with serious medical conditions whom the state has to house. [32]
Furthermore, private prisons often charge governments for empty prison beds, resulting in excess costs for the governments. [24]
Con 3: All prisons—not just privately operated ones—should be abolished.
“Every private prison could close tomorrow, and not a single person would go home,” explains author Rachel Kushner. In fact, private prisons distract us from a deeper need: prison abolition.
“Private prisons should be abolished,” explains doctoral student Holly Genovese. “But if the problem is the profit—institutions unjustly benefiting from the labor of incarcerated people—the fight against private prisons is only a beginning. Political figures and others serious about fighting injustice must engage with the profit motives of federally and state-funded prisons as well, and seriously consider the abolition of all prisons—as they are all for profit.” [33] [34]
One needs to assess, adds Woods Ervin, a prison abolitionist with Critical Resistance, “the rate at which the prison-industrial complex is able to actually address rape and murder. We’ve spent astronomical amounts of our budgets at the municipal level, at the federal level, on policing and caging people. And yet I don’t think that people feel any safer from the threat of sexual assault or the threat of murder. What is the prison-industrial complex doing to actually solve those problems in our society?” [35]
Abolitionism focuses on community-level issues to prevent the concerns that lead to incarceration in the first place. Eliminating private prisons still leaves the problems of mass incarceration and public prisons.