Socialism in the United States is an increasingly popular topic. Some argue that the country should actively move toward socialism to spur social progress and greater equality , while others demand that the country prevent this by any means necessary. This subject is often brought up in connection with universal health care and free college education , ideas that are socialist by definition, or as a general warning against leftist politics.
While some American politicians openly promote socialism or socialist policies (Senator Bernie Sanders and Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez , for example), others reject the socialist label (during the 2020 presidential campaign candidate Kamala Harris said she was “not a Democratic Socialist ”) or invoke it as a dirty word that is contrary to American ideals (in the 2019 State of the Union address, President Donald Trump stated that the U.S. would “never be a socialist country,” because “we are born free, and we will stay free”). [1] [2]
Proudly using the socialist label is Zohran Kwame Mamdani , the New York State Assemblymember and member of the Democratic Socialists of America who became the Democratic Party’s nominee for the mayor of New York City in the 2025 election.
To consider whether the United States should adopt socialism or at least more socialist policies, the relevant terms must first be defined.
Socialism is an economic system in which private property is allowed but the major industries are communally owned and operated by the democratically elected government. A socialist economy is managed heavily by the government, from medical care to energy, education, and transportation, and it is funded through heavy taxation (compared to taxation in the U.S.) with a goal of redistributing wealth and instituting an egalitarian state; its emphasis is not on competition and individual freedoms but collectivism and a social egalitarian state. Communism is a more extreme form of socialism in which all private property and a profit-based economy of free businesses are abolished; everything is controlled by the government (in theory, “by the people”), often (in practice) through authoritarian means, repressing individual freedom of thought and action. [3] [4] [9]
Politically, socialist countries tend to be multiparty, with democratic elections. Most have mixed economies . For example, Denmark , Iceland , Finland , Norway , and Sweden , while heavily socialist, all combine socialism with features of capitalism . [4] [5]
Capitalism, the United States’ current economic model, is a policy in which private individuals and corporations control production, which is guided by free markets and consumer choices, not by the government. Capitalism is also called a free market economy or free enterprise economy. It functions on the basis of private property, the profit motive , and market competition. [6]
Politically, capitalist countries range from democracies to monarchies , oligarchies , and despotisms . Most Western countries are capitalist, including the United States , Canada , the United Kingdom , Ireland , Switzerland , Australia , and New Zealand . Also capitalist are Hong Kong , Singapore , Taiwan , and the United Arab Emirates . However, many of these countries, including the United States, have implemented socialist policies within their capitalist systems, such as social security , minimum wages , and energy subsidies. [7] [8]
Politically, communist countries tend to be led by one party, the communist party, and elections occur only within that party. Frequently, the military has significant political power. Historically, a secret police force has also shared that power, as in the former Soviet Union , the largest communist country in history. Civil liberties (such as freedom of the press, speech, and assembly) are publicly embraced but frequently limited in practice, often by force. Countries that are currently communist include China , Cuba , Laos , North Korea , and Vietnam . Worth noting is that some of these countries, including the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea ( North Korea ) and the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, label themselves as democratic or socialist though they meet the definition of communism and are run by communist parties. Additionally, some communist countries, such as China and Vietnam, operate with partial free-market economies, which is a cornerstone of capitalism, and some socialist policies. [4] [5] [10] [11] [12] [13]
Given those definitions, should the United States adopt more socialist policies, increasing taxation to fund such ideas as free college and Medicare for all?
Pro 1: The U.S. already has many successful and popular socialist policies.
A lot of everyday American policies are socialist: Medicare, social security, the minimum wage, and child labor laws, to name a few.
As Jack Schwartz, the late Newsday book editor and author explained, the Socialist Party platform of 1912 contained many policies Americans now wouldn’t think of as “socialist,” including “an eight-hour workday at a decent wage, a public-works program for the jobless (realized later in the New Deal’s Works Progress Administration ), safety regulations for workers in the mines and factories, a child-labor law , an old-age pension , unemployment and accident insurance, a graduated income tax, an inheritance tax, suffrage for women, a direct vote in national elections doing away with the electoral college , the creation of separate departments of health, education and labor, and a convention to revise the Constitution. The first of their political demands was absolute freedom of the press, speech and assembly.” [14]
If existing and proposed socialist policies are so heavily favored, they should be maintained.
Pro 2: Socialist policies can fix the income disparities created by unfettered capitalism.
Capitalism has resulted in the top 1% of Americans holding more wealth (a combined net worth of $44.6 trillion, or 30.3% of all wealth in the U.S.) than the bottom 50% of Americans ($3.7 trillion, or 2.5%) at the end of 2023. [34]
This disparity is not because billionaires work harder than those earning a minimum wage . Instead, rich Americans have more access and exposure to the stock market , and the Americans with the top 10% of wealth hold more than 88% of all available equity in corporations and mutual fund shares (and the top 1% hold more than twice as much equity as the bottom 50% of Americans combined). And nationwide crises, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, only increase these disparities. [22]
Socialist policies, particularly a wealth tax, could redistribute wealth and aid Americans who have been penalized by a structurally inequitable system.
Those who support socialist policies believe that the measures could “create a fairer, more generous system,” and “build upon…and improve capitalism.” Adding socialist policies isn’t an either/or debate against capitalism. Both systems can function together. [23]
Pro 3: The American public supports socialist, welfare policies.
In general, socialist policies are broadly supported by Americans: 69% support Medicare for all, 63% support free public college tuition, 59% support raising the minimum wage to $15 by 2025, 85% support paid work leave for illness, 82% support paid maternity leave, 69% support paid paternity leave, 67% support paid leave to care for an ill family member, 74% support continued social security benefits without cuts, 66% support government-led environmental protections, and 64% support a wealth tax. [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21]
Con 1: The U.S. already has too many costly socialist entitlements.
Socialism is a series of entitlements that cost the American public a considerable amount of money. Estimates for 2018 put the cost of Democratic Socialist proposals, including social security expansion, free college, paid family leave, and Medicare for all, at $42.5 trillion over ten years. In 2017 the federal government spent about $2.7 trillion on entitlements, including social security, Medicare, and unemployment insurance. If new entitlements cost $4.2 more per year, that’s a 157% increase in government spending for handouts. [24] [25]
To raise money to pay for the entitlements, taxes are going to have to be raised. The socialists propose a wealth tax, but 60% of registered voters were not in favor of a wealth tax if it applied to them (if they won the lottery, for example). [26]
Con 2: The job of the U.S. government is to promote equal opportunity, not promise equal results.
As the Dallas Federal Reserve explains, “Free enterprise means men and women have the opportunity to own economic resources, such as land, minerals, manufacturing plants and computers, and to use those tools to create goods and services for sale….Others have no intention of starting a business. If they choose, they can offer their labor, another economic resource, for wages and salaries….By allowing people to pursue their own interests, a free enterprise system can produce phenomenal results. Running shoes, walking shoes, mint toothpaste, gel toothpaste, skim milk, chocolate milk, cellular phones and BlackBerrys are just a few of the millions of products created as a result of economic freedom.” [31]
When the government allows individuals to pursue what is best for them without interference, individuals prosper, the country enjoys “an average per capita GDP roughly six times greater than those with lower levels of economic freedom, as well as higher life expectancy, political and civil liberties, gender equality, and happiness.” In summary, “The diversity of economic freedom….helps us thrive both as individuals and as a society.” [32]
Con 3: Capitalism reflects and reenforces America’s entrepreneurial spirit.
The American public does not support socialism. In fact, 57% of Americans have favorable views of capitalism, while 36% have a unfavorable view of socialism; 84% of Americans support free enterprise, a cornerstone of capitalism, and 60% believe a free market model is the best economy. [27] [28] [29] [33] [35]
Capitalism is the best fit for America’s entrepreneurial spirit. As Mark J. Perry, scholar at the American Enterprise Institute and professor of economics and finance at the University of Michigan, explains, “Capitalism will play a major role in the global revival of liberty and prosperity because it nurtures the human spirit, inspires human creativity, and promotes the spirit of enterprise. By providing a powerful system of incentives that promote thrift, hard work, and efficiency, capitalism creates wealth. The main difference between capitalism and socialism is this: Capitalism works.” [30]