Donald Trump
Donald Trump: I am pro-life.
Chris Matthews: How do you ban abortion? How do you actually do it?
Trump: Well, You go back to a position like they had where people will perhaps go to illegal places but you have to ban it...
Matthews: Do you believe in punishment for abortion, yes or no, as a principle?
Trump:] The answer is that there has to be some form of punishment.
Matthews: For the woman?
Trump: Yeah. There has to be some form.
Maggie Haberman, "Pressed on Abortion Ban, Donald Trump Sees a Penalty for Women," nytimes.com, Mar. 30, 2016
Editor’s Note: Shortly after the above Mar. 30, 2016 quote was released to the media, Trump’s campaign released a statement:
If Congress were to pass legislation making abortion illegal and the federal courts upheld this legislation, or any state were permitted to ban abortion under state and federal law, the doctor or any other person performing this illegal act upon a woman would be held legally responsible, not the woman. The woman is a victim in this case as is the life in her womb. My position has not changed — like Ronald Reagan, I am pro-life with exceptions.
In Sep. 2016, Donald Trump’s campaign released a letter to the Susan B. Anthony List, stating that he was committed to: "nominating pro-life justices to the U.S. Supreme Court," "signing into law the Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act, which would end painful late-term abortions nationwide," and making the Hyde Amendment permanent.
Trump previously expressed a not clear opinion, and a pro opinion on this question:
And I am pro-life. And if you look at the question, I was in business. They asked me a question as to pro-life or choice. And I said if you let it run, that I hate the concept of abortion. I hate the concept of abortion. And then since then, I’ve very much evolved.
And what happened is friends of mine years ago were going to have a child, and it was going to be aborted. And it wasn’t aborted. And that child today is a total superstar, a great, great child. And I saw that. And I saw other instances.
And I am very, very proud to say that I am pro-life.
Washington Post, "Annotated Transcript: The Aug. 6 GOP Debate," washingtonpost.com, Aug. 6, 2015
Our question specifically asks whether abortion should be "legal." Thus, if a candidate states that they are pro-life but does not advocate changing the law to make abortion illegal (for example, by overturning Roe v. Wade or supporting a constitutional amendment to do so), then we list them as not clear.
Trump: I’m very pro-choice. I hate the concept of abortion. I hate it. I hate everything it stands for. I cringe when I hear people debating the subject, but, you still, I just believe in choice.
Tim Russert: But you would not ban it?
Trump: No."
tpmtv, "Trump on Abortion in 1999," youtube.com, Apr. 19, 2011