First used in 2016, the phrase cancel culture (also known as callout culture ) is the removal (“canceling”) of support for individuals and their work—or for a group of people, an organization, or a company and their work—due to an opinion or action on their part deemed objectionable to the parties “calling” them out. The “canceling” is often orchestrated to deny or frustrate the expression of the called-out party’s beliefs or work. As Merriam-Webster defines the term, it is “the practice or tendency of engaging in mass canceling as a way of expressing disapproval and exerting social pressure.” [1] [13] [35]
Those canceled are typically first called out on social media to magnify public knowledge of the perceived offense, whereupon the campaign to cancel ensues. The canceling can take several forms, including the exerting of pressure on organizations to cancel the public appearances or speaking engagements of the parties deemed offensive; invading the venues where the targeted individuals are speaking and shouting them down or drowning them out with air horns, drums, or bells, disrupting the events or causing their cancellation; and, in the case of businesses deemed offensive, organizing boycotts of their products. Even historic brands with a century of name recognition have become targets of intense cancel campaigns, especially in 2020-21, when racial sensitivities were heightened in the wake of the death of George Floyd . Charged with using offensive racial imagery and stereotypes in their branding and logos, products such as Aunt Jemima pancake mix, Mrs. Butterworth syrup, Uncle Ben’s rice, and Cream of Wheat were all canceled, forced to rename their companies or redesign their products, branding, and advertising campaigns. [1] [37] [38] [39]
Celebrities and social and political leaders are frequently the targets of cancel campaigns. Actor and comedian Bill Cosby , who was found guilty in 2018 of drugging and sexually assaulting a woman and accused of assault by more than 50 women, is only one of many recent high-profile examples. Many writers have been targeted for their political views. Author J.K. Rowling of Harry Potter fame, for example, has come under intense criticism and cancel campaigns due to her opinions on gender politics and transgender athletes. But even everyday people can be caught in the crosshairs of these mass campaigns. After a public relations executive tweeted an offensive joke about AIDS before boarding a plane in London to travel to South Africa , an uproar on Twitter (now called X) followed, and by the time her plane landed, she had been “called out,” “canceled,” and fired from her job. [2] [3] [38]
The cancel campaigns are not always so successful or one-sided. In July 2020, after Goya Foods CEO Robert Unanue praised U.S. President Donald Trump for promoting a Hispanic prosperity initiative, liberal Latino leaders organized a boycott of Goya products despite Unanue’s similar praise of President Barack Obama . Instead of bankrupting the company, the attempted cancellation prompted the Bodega and Small Business Association to come to the company’s defense with a “ buy cott” to support thousands of Black and Latino Goya employees and the more than 13,000 shops that sell Goya products. [4] [5]
Anyone who remembers reading Nathaniel Hawthorne ’s The Scarlet Letter (whose main character must wear a scarlet A on her dress as punishment for her adultery, to publicly shame her) knows cancel culture is not new. Alexis de Tocqueville , French political scientist, historian, and politician, even noted seeds of the practice in Democracy in America (1835) after having toured the U.S. from 1831-32. As Tocqueville claimed, an American who dares to buck majority views in the court of public opinion will find a “political career is closed to him: he has offended the only power that has the capacity to open it up. Everything is refused him, even glory. Before publishing his opinions, he believed he had partisans; it seems to him that he no longer has any now that he has uncovered himself to all; for those who blame him express themselves openly, and those who think like him, without having his courage, keep silent and move away. He yields, he finally bends under the effort of each day and returns to silence as if he felt remorse for having spoken the truth.” [36]
What is new, however, is the ability of social media and the 24-hour news cycle to boost the speed, scope, and impact of the “cancel.”
So, is cancel culture good for society? Explore the debate below.
Pro 1: Cancel culture allows marginalized people to seek accountability where the justice system fails.
The Me Too movement gave innumerable women (and some men) the ability to call out and maybe cancel their countless abusers in a forum where the accusations could be widely heard.
As reporter Olivia Goldhill explains, “Men have sexually assaulted and harassed women with impunity for millennia. Incredibly, ever since the allegations against Hollywood impresario Harvey Weinstein stopped being an ‘open secret,’ a few famous men have finally faced repercussions for their actions. Where inept courts and HR departments have failed, a new tactic has succeeded: Women talking publicly about harassment on social media, fueling the public condemnation that’s forced men from their jobs and destroyed their reputations.” [6]
Adds Vox writer Constance Grady, “Historically, we as a culture don’t do much to the rich and famous and powerful men of the world when women say that those men have hurt them. We give them Oscars and a seat on the Supreme Court and in the White House, and we call their accusers liars or hysterical or unreliable. We treat the men and their power as sacrosanct and the women and their pain as disposable.” [7]
By Oct. 2018, the end of the first year of Me Too, 429 people faced 1,700 allegations of sexual misconduct. That cohort included Harvey Weinstein, now convicted of third-degree rape and a first-degree criminal sexual act. The allegations against Weinstein date to the late 1980s, and had long been an “open secret” in Hollywood. Without cancel culture, Weinstein might still be in a position of power. [8] [9] [10] [11]
Weinstein is the outlier in terms of criminal justice. Few powerful men are convicted of sexual misconduct. As of July 3, 2020, Me Too allegations had resulted in only seven convictions and five other people charged with sexual misconduct. However, 201 men in positions of power lost their jobs in the first year of Me Too due to sexual misconduct allegations that were posted on social media. [9] [10]
As lawyer and writer Jill Filipovic explains, “For the powerful, criminal convictions are rare, in part because these people have better tools to work the justice system and rarely fit the stereotype of a convict. So the court of public opinion ends up being where accusations—and just as often, accusers—are tried.” [12]
Beyond Me Too, other movements are also able to demand justice. Black Lives Matter has repeatedly called out the killing of Black men by police officers. The result was perhaps the biggest global civil rights movement in history when 15-26 million people marched globally for Black rights in June 2020. [13] [14]
Pro 2: Cancel culture gives voice to the disenfranchised and less powerful.
“The critics of cancel culture are plainly threatened not by a new and uniquely powerful kind of public criticism but by a new set of critics: young progressives, including many minorities and women who, largely through social media, have obtained a seat at the table where matters of justice and etiquette are debated and are banging it loudly to make up for lost time,” explains Osita Nwanevu, staff writer at The New Republic . [15]
Meredith Clark, assistant professor of media studies at the University of Virginia, elaborates on the power given to disenfranchised voices: “To me, it’s ultimately an expression of agency. To a certain extent: I really do think of it like a breakup and a taking back of one’s power.” [16]
“While there may be instances of collateral damage [in cancel culture], even people innocently accused, a more pressing problem to address is how and why institutions we are supposed to trust are deaf to many of the problems facing women and minority groups,” adds author Oscar Schwartz. [17]
While not everyone has access to legislators or other powerful people, everyone can sign up for a Twitter (now X) account. “Canceling is a way to acknowledge that you don’t have to have the power to change structural inequality. You don’t even have to have the power to change all of public sentiment. But as an individual, you can still have power beyond measure [online],” and “for black culture and cultures of people who are lower income and disenfranchised, this is the first time you do have a voice in those types of conversations,” explains Anne Charity Hudley, chair of the Linguistics of African America at the University of California Santa Barbara. [18]
Dee Lockett, music editor for Vulture , has summarized the results of the social media callouts during the 2020 Black Lives Matter protests: “It’s been most effective as a collective public display of pointing the finger at a problem. It’s a massive signal boost, but that doesn’t mean it’s valueless. It’s performative . . . to post these screenshots of our donation receipts, swipe ups to anti-black reading lists, and lying en masse on the grass for eight-plus minutes as George Floyd’s last words are recited over a mic. It’s also the language and currency of this era. Purses are opening. Cops (in one case) have been charged. There’s also a lot of value in seeing your faves turn into grassroots activists overnight. . . . I’ve never seen anything like it.” [20]
Pro 3: Cancel culture is simply a new form of boycott, a cherished tactic in the civil rights movement, to spur social and corporate change.
Lisa Nakamura, professor and director of the Digital Studies Institute at the University of Michigan, states that cancel culture is “a cultural boycott. It’s an agreement not to amplify, signal boost, give money to. People talk about the attention economy—when you deprive someone of your attention, you’re depriving them of a livelihood.” As she adds, “Socially irredeemable things are said on platforms all the time,” but cancellation provides “a culture of accountability which is not centralized and is haphazard, but needed to come into being.” [16]
As Professor Anne Charity Hudley has argued, “If you don’t have the ability to stop something through political means, what you can do is refuse to participate.” Boycotts have long been associated with civil rights movements, the most famous perhaps being the Montgomery Bus boycott that began in 1955 after Rosa Parks refused to sit in the back of an Alabama bus. [18] [19]
Craig Jenkins, Vulture music critic, refers to cancel culture as “a redrawing of the balance of power between brands and consumers—a necessary one, I think. I’m thrilled the brands are scared to death of saying the wrong thing for once.” [20]
Adds Vulture senior writer E. Alex Jung, “Accountability is a really good way to frame it. It’s actually asking, well, if Amazon is suddenly going to uproot systemic racism (lol), what does that actually mean in terms of their labor practices? Or Twitter trying to stand in solidarity with Black Lives Matter even though as a company they haven’t taken racism and misogyny that affected their users seriously for years. The question is how deep this reckoning goes.” [20]
Meanwhile, at least 800 big brands like Coca-Cola, Unilever, and Ford are using cancel culture to boycott Facebook advertising because of the platform’s refusal to censor the speech of organizations deemed “hate groups.” [21]
Con 1: Cancel culture reflects a mob mentality, spurring bullying, injustice, threats, and even violence.
Sam Biddle, the journalist who retweeted Justine Sacco’s joke about AIDS that resulted in her firing while on a plane to South Africa, later regretted his actions and their results, stating, “It’s easy and thrilling to hate a stranger online.” [22]
In most cases, the online supporters of the cancel campaign have no idea if the accusations against the accused are even true. The accused has been found guilty in the court of public opinion, and that’s good enough for them. All sense of justice goes out the window.
Author and community organizer Asam Ahmad notes that canceling an everyday person without compassion amounts to bullying: “For instance, most call-outs I have witnessed immediately render anyone who has committed a perceived wrong as an outsider to the community. One action becomes a reason to pass judgment on someone’s entire being, as if there is no difference between a community member or friend and a random stranger walking down the street (who is of course also someone’s friend). Call-out culture can end up mirroring what the prison industrial complex teaches us about crime and punishment: to banish and dispose of individuals rather than to engage with them as people with complicated stories and histories.” All sense of decency is lost amid the mob mentality’s rash rush to condemn and cancel. [23]
Like the incident with Sacco, a single callout frequently snowballs into a mob attack on an individual. Anna Richards, vice president at The Neutral Zone Coaching and Consulting Services, notes that those doing the calling out are “taking this moral high ground, with a lot of righteous indignation, and inviting others to participate in a public shaming exercise.” [24]
Adds high school student Alex Miranda, “All too commonly . . . users feed off the negativity presented in these online boycotts to create a hate train of mass cyberbullying targeted at one specific individual. Death threats are oftentimes among the list of obscene proclamations directed toward canceled individuals, which elevate the resented climate to an even more alarming state and can lead to real-life detriments. From this perspective, social media users’ retaliation against those who are canceled is sometimes more offensive than the exposed behavior of the offender.” [25]
Sameer Hinduja, codirector of the Cyberbullying Research Center at Florida Atlantic University, states that cyberbullies are “more likely to feel free from social norms and morals and ethics and rules and possible punishments and sanctions when they’re behind a screen and physically distant or geographically separate from the target.” They get drunk and reckless behind their shield of anonymity. [26]
The canceling can even turn deadly. After years of attempts to obstruct and cancel his appearances on college campuses nationwide, Christian-conservative activist Charlie Kirk, founder of Turning Point USA, was a victim of the ultimate cancel: he was assassinated on September 10, 2025, while speaking at Utah Valley University in Orem, Utah. Shockingly, many students who disliked Kirk supported the assassination and the general use of violence to cancel people with viewpoints they disagreed with. Two days after the killing, the annual College Free Speech Rankings survey by FIRE (Foundation for Individual Rights in Education) revealed that the number of students who said it was acceptable to use violence to stop a speaker had risen from 1 in 5 students in 2020 to 1 in 3 in 2025. [40]
Con 2: Cancel culture is unproductive in generating real social change.
President Barack Obama states, “Like, if I tweet or hashtag about how you didn’t do something right or used the wrong verb, then I can sit back and feel pretty good about myself, ’cause, ‘Man, you see how woke I was. I called you out.’. . . That’s not activism. That’s not bringing about change. If all you’re doing is casting stones, you’re probably not going to get that far. That’s easy to do.” [27]
As Black Lives Matter cofounder Patrisse Khan-Cullors has noted, “People don’t understand that [social activist] organizing isn’t going online and cussing people out or going to a protest and calling something out.” Activism is hard work entailing sometimes boring meetings, strategy sessions, building a campaign, and getting petitions signed. [28]
“Mainstream internet activism is a lot of calling out and blaming and shaming. We have to get honest with ourselves about whether calling out and canceling gives us more than a short-term release of cathartic anger,” says Aaron Rose, a corporate diversity and inclusion consultant. He admits that cancel culture did not give him the conclusions he wanted: “I was not seeing the true change I desired. . . . We were still sad and mad. And the bad people were still bad. And everyone was still traumatized.” [18]
Frequently, cancel culture backfires and engenders sympathy for the alleged offender, leading to continued support by fans. Comedian Louis C.K., accused of sexual misconduct, took what amounted to a ten-month vacation before selling out dozens of comedy shows. After enduring decades of cancellations and documentaries about their alleged misdeeds, both R. Kelly’s and Michael Jackson’s music saw increases in streaming. Kevin Hart withdrew from his Oscars hosting job (for tweets deemed homophobic) but saw no decline in audience for his movies or stand-up specials. [18]
Aaron Rose, among others, has promoted individual conversations with the people under attack to encourage growth on both sides. Some have dubbed this “calling in.”
Author and digital strategist Maisha Z. Johnson offers, “Addressing harmful behavior is important, but so is understanding that everyone is on a different step of their journey, so we all make mistakes. And we all have different strengths—so if someone’s lacking in one area, like knowing vocabulary words, we don’t have to treat them like they’re totally disposable to the movement. We can help them grow in that area, and hope that others would help us in the areas we need to grow, too.” [29]
Con 3: Cancel culture is a slippery slope that too often spurs intolerance, ignorance, and violations of free speech.
Author Loretta Ross deems cancel culture a “cannibalistic maw” that is “sometimes . . . just ruthless hazing.” [30]
In a July 4, 2020, speech at Mount Rushmore, President Trump stated, “One of [the left’s] political weapons is ‘cancel culture’—driving people from their jobs, shaming dissenters, and demanding total submission from anyone who disagrees. This is the very definition of totalitarianism, and it is completely alien to our culture and our values, and it has absolutely no place in the United States of America.” [31]
Instead of canceling people, we should be encouraging more people to tell their stories, no matter how painful such stories might be to hear. Connecting cancel culture to the dismantling of historical statues , Christian Sagars of the Deseret News says, “Instead, they [those doing the canceling] have come for the opportunistic Columbus and the slave-owning Founding Fathers. They have come for Brigham Young, the eponym of my alma mater and the leader of one of the largest religious migrations in the country’s history. It’s healthy to expose the thorny characters of history’s pages—and there’s a distinction for those who fought against their country and those who built it—but to ignore or eliminate wholesale their contributions to the nation’s foundation is a slippery slope, indeed.” [32]
Cancel culture is also a slippery slope for those doing the calling out, as Steven Mintz, professor emeritus at California Polytechnic State University in San Luis Obispo, explains: “Some members of the canceling group join in for fear of being canceled themselves. People should be able to speak out or remain silent on the issues without fear of retribution.” He continues by calling for more tolerance and “willingness to allow the existence of opinions or behavior that one does not necessarily agree with and not seek to harm the offender.” [33]