Zoos have existed in some form since at least 2500 bce in Egypt and Mesopotamia , where records indicate that giraffes , bears , dolphins , and other animals were kept by aristocrats . These private collections of wild and exotic animals for exhibition, called menageries , were precursors to modern zoos; a menagerie is now a general term for any unusual and varied collection of things. The oldest zoo still operating is Austria ’s Vienna Zoo (Tiergarten Schönbrunn), which began as a menagerie in 1752 in the gardens and park of the Schönbrunn Palace, the Habsburg rulers’ summer residence. It was opened to the public in 1779. [1] [2]
France’s king at this time, Louis XVI , also had a royal menagerie at his residence, the Palace of Versailles , outside of Paris . When the king was ousted and the palace abandoned during the French Revolution , the royal animals were transferred to the Paris “ Jardin des Plantes ” (“Garden of Plants”), which opened its menagerie to the public in 1794. [45] These menageries and early zoos were a perfect reflection of the ongoing Enlightenment , that spirit of curiosity then enveloping Europe when scholars sought to better to understand the natural world through science, reason, and observation. Studying animals was a key aspect of the Enlightenment. [46]
The word zoo evolved as a popular shortened form of “zoological garden,” which is what the founders of the London Zoological Society sought to create with the formation of their organization in 1826. They modeled their society after the Jardin des Plantes in Paris. [42] The London society opened its own “zoological garden” (later called the London Zoo ) two years later, in 1828. [43]
This zoological connection between Paris and London made history again in 1865, when the Jardin des Plantes transferred to London a small African male elephant named Jumbo, who grew into the largest elephant in the world and became a worldwide symbol and synonym for anything huge. The London Zoo received another animal destined for fame in 1914, when it inherited an American black bear cub called “Winnie,” named after its owner’s home in Winnipeg , Canada. The cub became a favorite of zoo visitors, inspiring English writer A. A. Milne ’s creation of Winnie-the-Pooh . [44]
By the mid-19th century, zoos were opening around the world. Largely modeled after the London Zoo , these facilities were intended for “genteel amusement and edification,” according to Emma Marris, environmental writer and Institute Fellow at the UCLA Institute of the Environment and Sustainability. As such, reptile houses, aviaries , and insectaries (a place for keeping and raising insects) were soon added to zoos, to move them beyond the mere spectacle of showcasing big scary animals. [40]
Carl Hagenbeck (1844-1913), an internationally famous German animal dealer and trainer, introduced at his Animal Park in Hamburg in 1907 the prototype of the modern open-air zoo, exhibiting animals not in obvious cages but in environments more akin to their natural habitat; he also instituted more humane methods of caring for and training zoo animals, deemphasizing the beating of the animals. This change prompted the shift in zoo narrative from entertainment to the protection of animals. In the late 20th century the narrative changed again, to the conservation of animals to stave off extinction . [40]
Controversy has long shadowed exhibitions of live animals, from displays of “exotic” humans in exhibits offensively called “ freak shows ” to zoos ignorant on how to properly care for their animals. For example, a gorilla from the French Congo named Madame Ningo, the first gorilla in North America and the first to arrive and be exhibited in the United States (1911), lived at the Bronx Zoo in New York City —she was fed hot dinners with cooked meat from a nearby restaurant, though gorillas are herbivores (plant eaters). The gorilla refused to eat and died in two weeks. The zoo director was furious with the animal, saying she “deserved to be [dead], for its obstinacy.” [3] [4]
In the contemporary debate over zoos, both sides tend to focus on animal welfare—whether zoos protect animals or imprison them. So, should zoos exist? Explore the debate below.
Pro 1: Zoos educate the public about animals and conservation efforts.
As of Mar. 2025, there were 238 accredited zoos in the United States. The zoos attract over 183 million visitors annually, which is more than the approximately 98.6 million spectators of games played in 2023–24 by the MLB, NBA, NFL, and NHL combined. [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]
According to a study of 26 zoos worldwide published in Conservation Biology , visitors to zoos increased their knowledge of biodiversity and specific individual actions to protect biodiversity. [11]
“Zoos provide people, especially impressionable children, with the opportunity to see these remarkable animals up close. People won’t protect what they don’t love, and they can’t love what they don’t know. No matter how closely programs like Planet Earth depict animals, nothing will match the bond of seeing them in real life. Just look at a child’s eyes at the zoo when he or she encounters a tiger or similarly majestic animal,” says Robin Ganzert, president and CEO of American Humane. [12]
Pro 2: Zoos produce helpful scientific research.
In all, 228 accredited zoos published 5,175 peer-reviewed papers between 1993 and 2013. In 2017, 173 accredited U.S. zoos spent $25 million on research, studied 485 species and subspecies of animals, worked on 1,280 research projects, and published 170 research papers. [13] [14]
Because so many diseases can be transmitted from animals to humans, such as Ebola, hantavirus, and bird flu, zoos frequently conduct disease surveillance research in wildlife populations and their own captive populations that can have a direct impact on human health. For example, the veterinary staff at the Bronx Zoo alerted health officials to the presence of West Nile virus. [15]
Zoos and zoo research are used in other ways, too, such as informing legislation like the Sustainable Shark Fisheries and Trade Act, helping engineers build a robot to move like a sidewinder snake, and encouraging minority students to enter STEM careers with workshops and programs. [37] [38] [39]
Pro 3: Zoos save species from extinction and other dangers.
Corroboree frogs, eastern bongos, regent honeyeaters, Panamanian golden frogs, Bellinger River snapping turtles, golden lion tamarins, and Amur leopards, among others, have been saved from extinction by zoos. [16]
Zoos are also working to save polar bears, tigers, and wild African elephants from habitat loss, apes and rhinos from poachers, dolphins and other whales from hunters, and bees and butterflies from population declines, among many other efforts to help many other animals. [17] [18] [19] [20]
According to researchers, 23% of birds and 47% of small mammals (weighing less than about 2.2 pounds) are being harmed by climate change. By keeping populations of animals and conducting wild repopulation, zoos can help preserve species in danger from climate change. There were only 9 California condors in the wild in 1985. However, by 2016 a joint conservation effort between the San Diego and Los Angeles zoos with other organizations had increased the population of condors in the wild to 276 and in captivity to 170. [21] [22] [23]
Przewalski’s horses, the last wild horses, were declared extinct in the wild in the 1960s when about 12 lived in zoos. By 2018, breeding programs at zoos had increased the number to 2,400 horses, and 800 were reintroduced to the wild. [24] [25]
Con 1: Zoos don’t educate the public enough to justify keeping animals captive.
A review published in Animal Studies Repository concluded that “to date there is no compelling or even particularly suggestive evidence for the claim that zoos and aquariums promote attitude change, education, and interest in conservation in visitors.” Even a study widely cited to justify the argument that zoos educate the public stated that “there was no overall statistically significant change in understanding [of ecological concepts] seen,” because visitors know a lot about ecology before going to the zoo. [26] [27]
TV shows such as Planet Earth bring wild animals into living rooms, allowing people to see the animals in their natural habitats without causing harm to animals such as the endangered snow leopard. As British comedian Romesh Ranganathan stated, “It still slightly surprises me that anybody thinks that we should have zoos at all. The animals always look miserable in captivity.…The idea that kids only get excited about things they can see in the flesh is ridiculous. My kids are obsessed with dinosaurs that no longer exist, and Skylanders, which have never existed.” [28]
Con 2: Zoos are detrimental to the animals’ physical health.
A study of 35 species of carnivores, including brown bears, cheetahs, and lions, found that zoo enclosures were too small for the animals to carry out their normal routines, which led to problems such as pacing and increased infant deaths. Polar bears, for example, had an infant mortality rate of 65% due to small enclosures. [29]
About 70% of adult male gorillas in North America have heart disease, the leading cause of death among gorillas in captivity, although the condition is almost completely absent in the wild. Other great apes have similar health problems in captivity. [4]
Captive elephants live about half as long as wild elephants—16.9 years versus 35.8 years for African elephants—and about half as long as working elephants—18.9 years versus 41.7 years for Asian elephants. Of 77 elephants in 13 zoos, 71 were overweight and spent 83% of their time indoors, contributing to early death. [30]
Con 3: Zoo confinement is psychologically harmful to animals.
Animal behaviorists often see zoo animals suffering from behavioral problems not seen in the wild, such as clinical depression in clouded leopards and gibbons, obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) in brown bears, and anxiety in giraffes. The animals experience these issues due to smaller enclosures, changes in diet and activities, and the introduction of things not seen in the wild, such as medical exams and people with cameras. The Toledo Zoo in Ohio ran a psychiatric program in which a gorilla with premenstrual depression was prescribed Prozac . To ease them into new habitats, an agitated tiger was given Valium , and anxious zebras and wildebeests were given Haldol. [31] [32] [33]
A study of captive chimpanzees found that “abnormal behavior is endemic in the population” and includes behaviors such as eating feces, twitching, rocking back and forth, plucking hair, pacing, vomiting, and self-mutilation. The study concluded that the cause of such behavior could be mental health issues. [34]
Captive whales have exhibited a lot of problems and even dangerous behavior. According to one study, 24% of captive orcas (killer whales) had “major” to “extreme” tooth wear, and 60% had tooth fractures as a result of stress-induced teeth grinding. The 2013 documentary Blackfish highlighted the case of Tilikum, a male orca ( killer whale ) captured at age two off the coast of Iceland in 1983 and long kept at SeaWorld Orlando in Florida, where he was a star attraction and performer, until his death from a lung infection in 2017. Confined for nearly his whole life, Tilikum became the largest orca in captivity. He also grew increasingly aggressive, eventually killing three people, including two trainers. The deaths led to many ethical discussions about captive animals and even spurred legislation concerning marine mammals in captivity. The breeding of captive orcas was outlawed in certain states, zoos, and theme parks. [35] [36]