A gig is a part-time job, sometimes termed “non-standard work,” performed by freelancers for a limited amount of time. The word has historically been used by musicians and singers who have “gigs” with a specific band or venue for a certain period of time and then move on to another band or venue. For example, a bass player might play on a Taylor Swift tour and then record the soundtrack for Wicked while also playing with a local band at a bar on weekends—each of those jobs is a gig . [1]
The term gig economy was coined and explained by journalist and editor Tina Brown in a 2009 article published at The Daily Beast :
No one I know has a job anymore. They’ve got Gigs.
Gigs: a bunch of free-floating projects, consultancies, and part-time bits and pieces they try and stitch together to make what they refer to wryly as “the Nut”—the sum that allows them to hang on to the apartment, the health-care policy, the baby sitter, and the school fees. [2]
Merriam-Webster broadly defines the gig economy as “economic activity that involves the use of temporary or freelance workers to perform jobs typically in the service sector.” However, other definitions also include workers outside the service industry who work on contract, such as freelance writers. [3] [4]
Examples of gig economy jobs include:
driving for a rideshare company such as Uber or Lyft;
driving for a rideshare company such as
or Lyft;
delivering groceries via Instacart;
delivering groceries via Instacart;
performing home maintenance duties via Taskrabbit or Thumbtack;
performing home maintenance duties via Taskrabbit or Thumbtack;
delivering meals via Grubhub or DoorDash;
delivering meals via Grubhub or DoorDash;
freelance graphic design or writing via Upwork and Fiverr;
freelance graphic design or writing via Upwork and Fiverr;
selling handmade goods via Etsy ;
selling handmade goods via
;
When defined more broadly, the term includes temporary workers (also called “temps”) who fill in for absent receptionists and other office workers, as well as adjunct college instructors , making the new gig economy more “ white collar ” than traditionally defined. As Tina Brown noted,
To people I know in the bottom income brackets, living paycheck to paycheck, the Gig Economy has been old news for years. What’s new is the way it’s hit the demographic that used to assume that a college degree from an elite school was the passport to job security. [2]
The gig economy that “burst onto the scene in 2009,” according to the ADP Editorial Team, stemmed from several developments: the 2007–08 financial crisis , during which more people with traditional jobs needed “ side hustles ” to make ends meet; the tech explosion that allowed people to work from virtually anywhere; and the inception of the ever-expanding universe of apps and websites such as Airbnb (2008), Uber (2009), and Postmates (2011). [5]
Although the COVID-19 pandemic temporarily paused the growth of the gig economy, the industry has continued to grow and increase in value. Research suggests that what was a $556.7 billion market (total economic activity) in 2024 will more than double to $1.8 trillion by 2032. [24]
Data about who has a gig economy job is just emerging, but surveys show that between 25 and 35 percent of American workers contribute to the gig economy, either for a primary or secondary income, which translates to at least 41 million people as of 2024. The World Economic Forum estimates that 45 percent of Millennials participate in the gig economy, compared with 27 percent of Generation X , 15 percent of Generation Z , 9 percent of Baby Boomers , and 4 percent of the Silent Generation . [7] [8]
What may be surprising is that, according to the most recent data (2017), the largest cohort of gig workers (20.6 percent) is professionals, working, for example, as accountants, consultants, and architects. Construction gigs follow with 17.2 percent. Meanwhile, the jobs we most associate with the gig economy, such as driving for a ride-share company, account for just 5.3 percent of the gig workforce. The types of gig work available are wide-ranging and expanding. [9]
As Elizabeth Woyke, coauthor of Serving Workers in the Gig Economy , summarized:
If you think about it, the reason we have the gig economy is because of huge macroeconomic forces, like globalization of work, global trade, outsourcing and technology shifts like the rise of smartphones . I don’t think anyone thinks that any of those trends are going away certainly, and so I think the gig economy is not either. [10]
But is the gig economy good for us? Explore the debate below.
Pro 1: The gig economy offers job flexibility.
Many younger workers are not interested in the traditional “nine-to-five” job. They question why they need to commute to an office when they have the Internet at home. The monotonous day-to-day of office work does not suit them and can lead to job dissatisfaction. Gig work allows for flexibility in hours worked and the kind of work pursued, giving gig workers a fair amount of freedom. [10]
Plus, Americans with traditional jobs “are working an average of 47 hours a week—there’s no 40-hour working week anymore. And now, with the advent of technology, managers expect their employees to answer emails and phone calls after work hours, with no additional pay, so employees are burning out and leaving their companies,” said Dan Schawbel, founder of Millennial Branding. Gig workers, however, are working an average of 36 hours, which is more in line with the traditional expectation of 40 hours and which allows for a better work-life balance. [11] [25]
Because gig workers can often set their own hours, they can fit work around classes, child care, doctor’s appointments, various necessities such as grocery shopping, and even emergencies.
Furthermore, the gig economy allows for flexibility in the types of jobs a person can pursue. As the Center for Research in Education and Development Pakistan explained, “The gig economy has made the job market more open. Young workers, no matter where they come from or their level of formal education, can use their skills to find work. Platforms offering such work prioritize merit over traditional credentials, promoting a shift towards a more inclusive society where talent triumphs. This inclusivity extends beyond conventional workplace norms, allowing individuals from diverse backgrounds to showcase their capabilities and contribute meaningfully to the workforce.” [12]
Pro 2: The gig economy provides extra income.
As Encyclopædia Britannica Money noted, “We could all use a little extra cash in our pockets every now and then. And if you’re living paycheck-to-paycheck, you’re not only giving yourself little to no margin for error (or emergency), but you may also be shortchanging your retirement and other financial goals. One way to give a boost to your monthly budget is to pick up some side-hustle income in your free time.” [13]
Joining the gig economy can not only relieve some or all of the stress of living without a financial cushion, but it can also provide quick money for anything from a medical emergency to a vacation, so you don’t have to dip into savings or retirement funds. Gig work can also fill in when too few hours are available for working a primary job in a downturn or a seasonal slump, as is common, for example, in the construction industry.
While kids and teens have been in the gig economy for eons via babysitting and mowing lawns, the new gig economy offers these younger workers an organized platform (rather than knocking on neighbors’ doors) and more fruitful options, from dog walking and tutoring to programming, website design, and social media management. Kids and teens can work toward purchasing their own sports equipment, gaming consoles, beauty hauls, or saving for college, providing them with entrepreneurial work experience and a financial education not generally provided by schools. They learn self-management skills and experience the pride of earning on their own. [14]
“And who knows? Today’s side hustle may be tomorrow’s full-time career or successful start-up. Influencers, hoteliers, franchisees, transportation magnates—many started out as side businesses,” stated Encyclopædia Britannica Money. Kids and adults alike gain valuable experience, maybe finding their life’s calling (or sampling professions that they thought they’d like but do not in the end), all while earning money in the process. [13]
Pro 3: The gig economy provides society with immediate access to specialized workers.
“Alternative work arrangements enable businesses, especially small ones, to access specialized skills like software development, search engine optimization, and translation that they do not need or cannot afford on an ongoing basis. In the absence of a healthy market for independent work, these businesses may have to hire full-time employees who may not be fully utilized or may have to forgo benefitting from these services,” said Paul Oyer, professor of economics at Stanford University. [15]
With businesses now moving at the speed of the global Internet, they need to find workers who can solve problems quickly and efficiently. But, for the benefit of the employer and worker alike, in the gig economy these specialists are able to move on to their next job without the stress of a traditional job hunt and elaborate onboarding with a new employer. [11]
Plus, this new class of workers welcomes this arrangement: “The old leadership was about command and control,” explained Dan Schawbel, founder of Millennial Branding. “Boomer leaders are autocratic leaders, whereas my generation is all about transformational leadership—having a vision, meaningful work, encouraging the best in others, collaborating as a team.” [11]
For example, a company may hire a graphic designer as a gig worker to create a new branding package. This arrangement saves the company from hiring a graphic designer for whom they have no full-time work, while allowing the temp designer an enriching experience creating and working for a variety of clients. The company may also be able to pay the graphic designer a higher fee for the branding package because they are not paying a full-time, year-round employee. [16]
Con 1: The gig economy creates job insecurity.
Gig workers do not have a permanent job and routinely live on the verge of unemployment. A study of gig workers in Australia reported that they face “higher rates of stress than the general population” because of the “uncertainty, unpredictability, and instability of both schedules and income earned.” [17]
Companies also suffer from the gig economy mentality, said human resources expert Riia O’Donnell: “While a freelancer wants to keep you as a client, your company’s individual success is not their priority.” As she explains, “A full-time employee is likely to feel a higher level of commitment to your organisation, and therefore more motivated to add to the bottom line. In-house employees are aware of everything that’s going on in the company, and can leverage that knowledge to your advantage when building relationships with clients. Freelancers don’t have that access.” [11]
Gig workers also generally don’t have opportunities for career advancement, further splintering them from the company. While gig workers may be theoretically in favor of not “climbing the corporate ladder,” they also have few opportunities for promotions, significant salary increases, or bonuses for a job well done. Employers have little to no incentive to raise wages when they can easily replace a gig worker with yet another gig worker. [18]
Furthermore, gig workers usually do not have coworkers. So not only is there no one with whom they can celebrate wins or grumble about the boss, but there is no one to stave off loneliness during the workday. Gig workers aren’t going out to lunch with their coworkers or chatting at the proverbial water cooler. Without this support, job dissatisfaction can grow, leaving gig workers to bounce between jobs looking for fulfillment, which in turn further increases job instability in an economy that still favors full-time employees, company loyalty, and a stable work history. [19]
Con 2: The gig economy lacks traditional job benefits.
Traditional job benefits can include sick days, vacation days, health insurance (including vision and dental), retirement benefits, life insurance , shares in the company, paid parental leave, child care, and access to a variety of facilities such as cafeterias and gyms.
The gig economy includes none of these benefits. Plus, a wage for a gig worker “can vary drastically, and by no means has a fixed minimum. For many, the ‘feast or famine ’ style of income can be difficult and stressful; this fluctuation in earnings can make it difficult to save for the future, which is exacerbated further by not being entitled to some form of a retirement package or pension contribution. Then there is the formidable issue of no sick leave—if gig workers are unable to work, they simply do not earn,” explained journalist Elizabeth Matsangou. [10]
While 74.3 percent of gig workers in the U.S. had health insurance in July 2023, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, only 19.9 percent had health insurance provided by their employer, which means that not only are gig workers paying for their entire health insurance premium (which is generally higher than employer plans) but they also have to navigate signing up and renewing their policies every year without the assistance and expertise of a formal human resources department. [10] [20]
Gig workers also face the daunting task of taxes. In the United States, contract workers pay taxes every quarter (so, four times a year compared with once for traditional employees), and they must estimate what they think they will owe the Internal Revenue Service since their yearly incomes are unstable. Gig workers also have to pay both the employer and employee Social Security and Medicare contributions (15.3 percent of their net income). [8] [10] [21]
Con 3: The gig economy is built on worker exploitation.
“Because workplace laws protect employees and not independent contractors, gig companies like Uber and Lyft save a bucket of money on both wages and taxes by avoiding the obligations that every other employer must follow: wage-related laws as well as unemployment, Social Security and Medicare taxes. As a result, gig workers can find themselves paid sub- minimum wages , for example, or left without workers’ compensation when injured or killed on the job,” explained Terri Gerstein, director of the Wagner Labor Initiative at New York University. “Another consequence is that law-abiding employers face unfair competition with businesses that don’t follow the rules, and critical safety-net programs like unemployment insurance lose badly needed funds.” [22]
In 2023 gig workers with full-time jobs earned an average of $838 per week, compared with ”workers with traditional arrangements,” who earned about $1,132. [20]
For younger generations, the “gig is up,” so to speak, on the gig economy because of this exploitation. As explained by Oli Mould, professor in human geography at the University of London, for Generation Z, “the modern ‘hustle’—a culture of relentless job-hopping for small marginal gains—has been exposed as a scam.… [And] this generation is navigating a workplace of reducing benefits, pay and stability….So now they are opting out. Instead of bouncing from job to job in search of some mythical dream placement, they’re keen to stay put, choosing stability over chaos, community over churn.” [23]
Generation Z is increasingly looking to stay with an employer (not an app) for seven or more years, mimicking the experiences of those in Generation X or older, rather than settling for the millennial hustle of the gig economy.