8000 BC-63 BC
8000 BC - Origins of the Domestic Cow
Aurochs , the wild ancestors of modern cows , once ranged over large areas of Asia , Europe and North Africa .
Aurochs were first domesticated 8,000 to 10,000 years ago in the Fertile Crescent area of the Near East and evolved into two types of domestic cattle , the humped Zebu (Bos indicus) and the humpless European Highland cattle (Bos taurus).
Some scientists believe that domesticated cattle from the Fertile Crescent spread throughout Eurasia , while others believe that a separate domestication event took place in the area of India and Pakistan . [27]
4000 BC - Early Evidence of Milking Cattle in Neolithic Britain
Through analyzing degraded fats on unearthed potshards, scientists have discovered that Neolithic farmers in Britain and Northern Europe may have been among the first to begin milking cattle for human consumption. The dairying activities of these European farmers may have begun as early as 6,000 years ago. According to scientists, the ability to digest milk was slowly gained some time between 5000-4000 B.C.E. by the spread of a genetic mutation called lactase persistence that allowed post-weaned humans to continue to digest milk . If that date is correct, it may pre-date the rise of other major dairying civilizations in the Near East, India, and North Africa. [43] [44]
3000 BC - Evidence of Dairy Cows Playing a Major Role in Ancient Sumerian Civilization
Although there is evidence of cattle domestication in Mesopotamia as early as 8000 B.C.E., the milking of dairy cows did not become a major part of Sumerian civilization until approximately 3000 B.C.E.
Archaeological evidence shows that the Ancient Sumerians drank cow’s milk and also made cow’s milk into cheeses and butters .
The picture to the left is of a carved dairy scene found in the temple of Ninhursag in the Sumerian city of Tell al-Ubaid. The scene, which shows typical dairy activities such as milking, straining and making butter, dates to the first half of the third millennium B.C.E. [45]
3100 BC - The Domesticated Cow Appears in Ancient Egyptian Civilization
At least as early as 3100 B.C.E., the domesticated cow had been introduced to, or had been separately domesticated in, Northern Africa.
In Ancient Egypt , the domesticated cow played a major role in Egyptian agriculture and spirituality.
Attesting to its central role in Egyptian life, the cow was deified. The Egyptians "held the cow sacred and dedicated her to Isis, goddess of agriculture; but more than that, the cow was a goddess in her own right, named Hathor, who guarded the fertility of the land." [46]
2000 BC - The Domesticated Cow Appears in Northern Indian Vedic Civilization
By 2000 B.C.E, the domesticated cow had appeared in Northern India, coinciding with the arrival of the Aryan nomads .
The Vedic civilization that ruled Northern India from about 1750 BCE to about 500 BCE relied heavily upon the cow and the dairy products that it provided.
The heavy dependence on the cow was reinforced by the Vedas (the religious epics of the Hindu religion) wherein the cow was considered a sacred animal. [47]
1700-63 BC - Milk in Ancient Hebrew Civilization and the Bible
"The ancient Hebrews … held milk in high favor; the earliest Hebrew scriptures contain abundant evidence of the widespread use of milk from very early times. The Old Testament refers to a ’land which floweth with milk and honey’ some twenty times. The phrase describes Palestine as a land of extraordinary fertility, providing all the comforts and necessities of life. In all, the Bible contains some fifty references to milk and milk products." [46]
1800-1899
Early 1800s - Milk Maids and the Compulsory Smallpox Vaccine in the United States
In the 18th century it was common folk knowledge in Europe that milk maids (women who milked cows) seemed to be immune from the smallpox plagues when they swept through Europe. .
In 1796, English physician Edward Jenner developed a vaccine for smallpox based upon this folk knowledge.
Recognizing that dairymaids infected with cowpox were immune to small-pox , Jenner deliberately infected James Phipps, an eight year old boy, with cowpox in 1796. He then exposed Phipps to smallpox-which Phipps failed to contract. After repeating the experiment on other children, including his own son, Jenner concluded that vaccination provided immunity to smallpox.
In the United States, compulsory smallpox vaccination was introduced on a state by state basis, beginning in the early 1800s. [50]
1840-1920s - Milk Production and Distillery Dairies in the United States
In the early 19th century, the alcohol distillery business in the United States began to grow. Large amounts of swill (spent-grains) were produced as a byproduct of whiskey and other alcohol production. Many distilleries opened dairies and began feeding their dairy cows with the waste swill. The low nutritional content of the swill lead to sickness in the cows and in the humans who drank their milk.
"Confined to filthy, manure-filled pens, the unfortunate cows gave a pale, bluish milk so poor in quality, it couldn’t even be used for making butter or cheese." [51]
1822-1895 - The Process of Pasteurization is Developed by Louis Pasteur
French chemist and biologist Louis Pasteur , considered one of the fathers of microbiology, helped prove that infectious diseases and food-borne illnesses were caused by germs , known as the "germ theory."
Pasteur’s research demonstrated that harmful microbes in milk and wine caused sickness, and he invented a process - now called "pasteurization" - whereby the liquids were rapidly heated and cooled to kill most of the organisms. [52]
March 23, 1883 - The New York Milk War
In 1883 a struggle known as the "milk war" broke out between milk farmers/producers and milk distribution companies in New-York. Milk farmers demanded a higher price for their milk. When the distribution companies refused to pay more the farmers organized ‘spilling committees’ that blocked roads, seized shipments and dumped out their own milk instead of selling it to the distributors. These ‘spilling committees’ created a ‘milk famine’ in New York City in an effort to force the milk distribution companies to pay the farmers higher prices for their milk. “In late March, 1883, a temporary settlement was reached between committees of the striking dairy farmers and the milk retailers, the latter representing about 800 of their fellow businessmen. They agreed to set the price of milk at 2½-4¢ a quart, depending on the season. Disputes between milk producers and dealers would resurface at times over the years, the most notable of which were the milk strikes of the early 1930s during the Great Depression." [53]
1884 - First Glass Milk Bottles Patented
"One of the first glass milk bottles was patented in 1884 by Dr. Henry Thatcher, after seeing a milkman making deliveries from an open bucket into which a child’s filthy rag doll had accidentally fallen. By 1889, his Thatcher’s Common Sense Milk Jar had become an industry standard. It was sealed with a waxed paper disc that was pressed into a groove inside the bottle’s neck. The milk bottle, and the regular morning arrival of the milkman, remained a part of American life until the 1950s, when waxed paper cartons of milk began appearing in markets." [54]
1893 - Dr. Henry L. Coit Forms the Medical Milk Commission to Certify Raw Milk
“In the mid-to-late 1800s milk-born illness was a major problem.
Milk produced at unhygienic production facilities (like distillery dairies) served as a medium to spread diseases like typhoid and tuberculosis. These diseases created a public health crisis that led to skyrocketing infant mortality in the cities.
As a result, "[i]n 1889, two years before the death of his son from contaminated milk, Newark, New Jersey doctor Henry Coit, MD urged the creation of a Medical Milk Commission to oversee or ’certify’ production of milk for cleanliness, finally getting one formed in 1893." [55]
1895 - Commercial Pasteurization of Milk Begins
In 1895, commercial pasteurizing machines for milk were introduced in the United States. [56]
1899 - Milk Homogenizer Is Patented
"In 1899 Auguste Gaulin obtained a patent on his homogenizer. The patent consisted of a 3 piston pump in which product was forced through one or more hair like tubes under pressure."
Homogenization breaks down the large fat globules in milk into tiny ones.
The process prevents the cream from separating and rising to the top as it does in non-homogenized milk. [57]
1900-1949
1913 - Typhoid Epidemic in New York City
The New York Times reported that a large typhoid epidemic in New York City was attributed to contaminated milk. [58]
1914 - The First Milk Tanker Trucks Are Introduced
The first tank trucks for transporting milk were put into service. [56]
1917 - Mandatory Pasteurization of Milk Begins
"By 1917, pasteurization of all milk except that from cows proven to be free of tuberculosis was either required or officially encouraged in 46 of the country’s 52 largest cities. The proportion of milk pasteurized in these cities ranged from 10 percent to 97 percent; in most it was well over 50 percent." [46]
1922 - Capper-Volstead Act Passed
Congress passed the Capper-Volstead Act, allowing producers of agricultural products, such as milk, to "act together in associations" to organize collective processing, preparation for market, handling, and marketing of milk and other agricultural goods. The act was of historic significance as it granted producers of milk and other agricultural products special exemptions from monopoly laws to help farmers raise the price for their products. [59]
1933 - Sioux City Milk War
In 1933 milk producers in Iowa organized a strike for higher milk prices.
One of the main tactics farmers used during the strike was to block roads and prevent milk from being shipped to Sioux City .
In one instance, strikers opened fire on a truck driver who was trying to get past a road blockade they had set up, seriously injuring four of the passengers. [60]
1937 - First Milk Marketing Orders Initiated
"Milk marketing orders came into existence as a result of the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937 … The rationale for the legislation was to reduce disorderly marketing conditions, improve price stability in fluid milk markets, and ensure a sufficient quantity of pure and wholesome milk. The orders are regulations approved by dairy farmers in individual fluid milk markets that require manufacturers to pay minimum monthly prices for milk purchases." [61]
August 28, 1939 - Dairy Farmers Union Strike
Dairy farmers in the countryside outside New York City were hit hard by the Great Depression . Milk prices in New York City fell so low that the milk distributors were paying farmers less for their milk than it cost them to produce it. As things got desperate, dairy farmers organized the Dairy Farmers Union (DFU). Led by Archie Wright, a former organizer for the radical Industrial Workers of the World , the DFU went on strike in 1939. During the strike, DFU members blocked roads and halted market-bound trucks. They confiscated milk and spilled it out on the roadsides. In some cases they threw bottles of kerosene on trucks that did not stop. The picketers fought non-strikers who tried to cross their lines, and State troopers who intervened. [62]
June 4, 1940 - First Federal Milk Program for Schools
"Federal assistance in providing milk for school children has been in operation since June 4, 1940, when a federally subsidized program was begun in Chicago. It was limited to 15 elementary schools with a total enrollment of 13,256 children. The schools selected were located in low-income areas of the city. The price to the children was 1 cent per one-half pint, and children who could not pay were given milk free, the cost being paid through donations by interested persons." [63]
1940s - Federally Subsidized Milk Advertising under the Works Progress Administration
The New Deal Did You Know? The New Deal. Implemented under the direction of President Franklin D. Roosevelt, the New Deal was a series of economic relief and reform initiatives intended to help the American people and businesses recover from the Great Depression. (more)
The Works Progress Administration (WPA) was formed on May 6, 1935, as a part of President Franklin D. Roosevelt’s New Deal plan to bring the United States out of the Great Depression. The WPA differed from other New Deal programs in that it focused on providing work for artists, educators, writers and musicians. The two posters pictured here were painted by artists under commission from the WPA. Like many WPA projects, these paintings served a dual purpose: to employ artists and to create increased demand for milk. As such, these paintings (and many others like them) were a form of federally subsidized dairy advertising. At its height, the WPA employed over 3 million people. [64]
1946 - National School Lunch Act Passed
In 1946, President Harry Truman signed the National School Lunch Act into law. The act was designed to provide nutritious lunches to the nation’s children. The reasoning behind the act was laid out in its text: "It is hereby declared to be the policy of Congress, as a measure of national security, to safeguard the health and well-being of the Nation’s children and to encourage the domestic consumption of nutritious agricultural commodities and other food, by assisting the States, through grants-in aid and other means, in providing an adequate supply of food and other facilities for the establishment, maintenance, operation and expansion of nonprofit school lunch programs." The Secretary of Agriculture prescribed three types of lunches which would be acceptable under the act, designated as Type A, Type B, and Type C. It was mandated that each lunch include between 1/2 to 2 pints of whole milk. [63]
1950-1999
1950s-1960s - Square Milk Carton Introduced
In the 1950s and 1960s many dairies began to introduce the square paper carton to replace bottles. The square shape allowed more milk to be carried and displayed in a given space than did the old glass bottles. The new cartons also reduced the cost of milk for consumers since disposable paper cartons were cheaper than glass bottles. [65]
October 11, 1966 - Child Nutrition Act of 1966 and the Special Milk Program
The Child Nutrition Act of 1966, signed into law by President Lyndon B. Johnson , authorized the Special Milk Program (SMP). "The SMP provides milk free of charge or at a low cost to children in schools and child care institutions that do not participate in other Federal child nutrition meal service programs. The federally assisted program reimburses schools for the milk they serve." [66]
1974 - Nutrition Labeling of Fluid Milk Begins
Voluntary nutrition labeling on fluid milk products was initiated after the FDA advised that all foods should have nutrition labels. [56]
1983 - Dairy Act of 1983 and the Creation of the National Dairy Board
"The Dairy Production Stabilization Act of 1983 (Dairy Act) authorized a national producer program for dairy product promotion, research, and nutrition education to increase human consumption of milk and dairy products and reduce milk surpluses. This self-help program is funded by a mandatory 15-cent-per-hundredweight assessment on all milk produced in the contiguous 48 States and marketed commercially by dairy farmers. It is administered by the National Dairy Promotion and Research Board (Dairy Board). The Dairy Act provides that dairy farmers can direct up to 10 cents per hundredweight of the assessment for contributions to qualified regional, State, or local dairy product promotion, research, or nutrition education programs." [67]
1990 - Fluid Milk Promotion Act
In 1990, the U.S. Congress passed the Fluid Milk Promotion Act to promote the sale of milk and to allow collective, producer financed, generic milk advertising. The act stated that "fluid milk products are basic foods and are a primary source of required nutrients such as calcium, and otherwise are a valuable part of the human diet," and mandated that "fluid milk products must be readily available and marketed efficiently to ensure that the people of the United States receive adequate nourishment." [68]
1992 - First USDA Food Pyramid Is Released
"The Food Guide Pyramid was introduced in 1992 to illustrate a food guide developed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) to help healthy Americans use the Dietary Guidelines to choose foods for a healthy diet. The Food Guide Pyramid is a graphic tool that conveys ’at a glance’ important dietary guidance concepts of variety, proportion, and moderation. These concepts are not new—with varying emphasis, they have been part of USDA food guides for almost 100 years." The 1992 Food Pyramid recommended that 2-3 servings of milk and other dairy products be consumed daily. [69]
1993 - "Got Milk?" Advertising Campaign Launched
In 1993, the California Milk Processor Board was formed to increase milk consumption. Their first major public success was the creation of the "Got Milk?" advertisement campaign. In 1995, the "Got Milk?" slogan was registered as a federal trademark by the National Dairy Boards and the "Got Milk?" campaign went national. "Awareness of GOT MILK? is over 90 percent nationally and it is considered one of the most important and successful campaigns in history… The Dairy industry spends $150-million annually to support GOT MILK?, including use on those Milk Mustache ads. In addition, the ’brand’ has become a hot property with over 100 product licensees." [70]
November 5, 1993 - Artificial Bovine Growth Hormone Approved by FDA
On November 5, 1993, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved genetically engineered Artificial Bovine Growth Hormone (rBST, rBGH, BGH) for commercial use in the United States. "In March 1993, before rbST was approved, an FDA advisory committee concluded that the use of rbST -- and any increased risk of mastitis and resulting increased use of antibiotics in treated cattle -- would not pose a risk to human health. Monsanto Co.’s Posilac, the only rbST product approved for increasing milk production in dairy cattle, was first marketed in February 1994." [71]
1994 - Protests against Artificial Bovine Growth Hormone Ensue
In response to the FDA approval of Artificial Bovine Growth Hormone (rBST, rBGH, BGH), the Pure Food Campaign launched a series of protests around the country where milk was spilled in symbolic protest. Jeremy Rifkin, an organizer of the Pure Food Campaign, stated that there was widespread public concern over the safety of rBST and that "We believe this product is a hazard to health." [72]
1994 - FDA Issues rBST Labeling Guidelines
In 1994, the FDA issued labeling guidelines for milk (and dairy products made with milk) produced by cows that have not been treated with rBST. In its guidelines the FDA stated: "Because of the presence of natural bST in milk, no milk is ’bST-free,’ and a ’bST-free’ labeling statement would be false." The FDA advised that the following statement should be included on all products labeled as being made with milk from cows that are not treated with rBST: "No significant difference has been shown between milk derived from rbST-treated and non-rbST-treated cows." [73]
1995 - Dairy Management, Inc. (DMI) Formed
"Dairy producer board members of the National Dairy Board (NDB) and the United Dairy Industry Association (UDIA) create Dairy Management Inc.™ (DMI) as the organization responsible for increasing demand for U.S.-produced dairy products on behalf of America’s dairy producers; direct coordination between national and local dairy promotion programs begins.
DMI forms the U.S. Dairy Export Council® (USDEC) to leverage investments of dairy processors, exporters, dairy producers, and industry suppliers to enhance the U.S. dairy industry’s ability to serve international markets. Both dairy checkoff dollars [funds collected from farmers for collective generic advertisements] and USDEC membership dues fund the organization." [74]
1995 - "Got Milk?" Barbie Released
“CMPB [California Milk Processors Board] and Mattel came out with a limited edition ’got milk?’ Barbie doll to remind young consumers to drink their milk … ‘[The] partnership with Mattel is the perfect example of the power of “got milk?” to attract and leverage great brands to sell more milk,’ says Jeff Manning, executive director of the CMPB.” [75]
1997 - Harvard Study on Milk and Bone Health Released
Harvard School of Public Health doctors published a study in the American Journal of Public Health titled "Milk, Dietary Calcium , and Bone Fractures in Women: A 12-Year Prospective Study." The study investigated whether higher intakes of milk and other high calcium foods during adulthood could reduce the risk of osteoporosis and related bone fractures. The study found that high intakes of milk (two or more glasses a day over a 12-year period) did not reduce the incidence of osteoporosis and related bone fractures. [76]
1998 - National Raw Milk Campaign Initiated
In 1998, the Weston A. Price Foundation initiated the "Real Milk Campaign" to promote the health benefits of raw cow’s milk and to advocate for the legalization of raw milk sales. The goal of the Real Milk Campaign is to make"[r]aw milk available to consumers in all 50 states and throughout the world!" In 2007, the sale of raw cow’s milk for human consumption was illegal in 17 states. [77]
2000-present
December 2001 - Merger Forms Largest US Dairy Producer
In December 2001, Suiza Foods Corporation acquired Dean Foods Company and formed the "new" Dean Foods Corporation. The new Dean Foods Corporation became the nation’s largest dairy processor and distributor with more than 25,000 employees and $10 billion in revenues. [78]
December 2002 - PETA Files False Advertising Lawsuit against the California Milk Board
People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) filed a December 2002 lawsuit against the California Milk Advisory Board (CMAB). PETA’s lawsuit claimed that the CMAB’s "Happy Cows" advertising campaign constituted false advertising. They charged that the idyllic living conditions of the "Happy Cows" were in stark contrast to the large factory farm reality of most dairy cows in California. The suit was thrown out by the California Superior Court in 2002. PETA appealed the decision to the California Supreme Court, which refused to review the case in 2005. [79]
January 5, 2004 - Dean Foods Acquires Horizon Organic
On January 5, 2004, Dean Foods, the nation’s largest dairy processor and distributor, acquired Horizon Organic, the nation’s leading organic milk and dairy product processor. [78]
2004 - Milk and Weight Loss Ad Campaign Initiated
In 2004, Dairy Management Inc. and the National Dairy Promotion and Research Board initiated a nationwide advertising campaign with the slogan "3-A-Day. Burn More Fat, Lose Weight." The advertising campaign ran television, print and internet advertising claiming that the consumption of 3 servings of milk or other dairy products each day could help with weight loss. [80]
2005 - Organic Milk’s Popularity Continues to Grow
In 2005, organic milk grew in popularity with a 23 percent increase in consumption over 2004. During this same time period, overall milk consumption dropped by 8 percent. [81]
2005 - USDA Dietary Guidelines Released
In 2005, the United States Department of Agriculture and the Department of Health and Human Services released an updated "Dietary Guidelines for Americans" that recommended Americans should: "Consume 3 cups per day of fat-free or low-fat milk or equivalent milk products." [82]
October 2005 - Physicians Group Files Lawsuit Demanding Lactose Intolerance Warnings on Milk
In October 2005, the Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine (PCRM) filed a class-action lawsuit on behalf of all residents of Washington, DC, against a number of large milk companies demanding lactose intolerance warnings on milk. PCRM filed the lawsuit "To help raise public awareness about lactose intolerance … on behalf of all residents in Washington, D.C., who may purchase milk without realizing the serious digestive distress it can cause. Filed in the Superior Court of the District of Columbia on October 6, the suit calls for all milk cartons sold in D.C. to carry labels warning of milk’s possible side effects." As of October 31, 2007, the case is still pending. [83]
2007 - Japanese Man Creates Beer from Milk
For many years, milk consumption in Japan had been on the decline, creating a surplus milk problem in Japan. The Japanese island of Hokkaido alone had to dispose of nearly 900 tons of surplus milk in a single month. Sensing an opportunity, Hokkaido liquor store owner Chitoshi Nakahara decided to see if he could ferment this excess milk into beer. The experiment worked, and Nakahara began selling "Bilk" in local liquor stores in 2007. [84]
2007 - Milk and Weight-Loss Claims Withdrawn
In response to a 2005 complaint from the Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine(PCRM), the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) published a letter regarding The National Fluid Milk Processor Promotion Board (and others) advertisements that claimed drinking milk helps with weight-loss. The letter stated that the FTC had been "advised by USDA staff that the Dairy Board, the Fluid Milk Board, and other affiliated entities that engage in advertising and promotional activities on behalf of the two boards, have determined that the best course of action at this time is to discontinue all advertising and other marketing activities involving weight loss claims until further research provides stronger, more conclusive evidence of an association between dairy consumption and weight loss." A lawsuit (still in appeals as of October 31, 2007) was also filed by the PCRM against a number of milk retail companies, including Kraft Foods and General Mills, to prevent them from making milk weight-loss claims. [85] [86] [87]
April 16, 2007 - Nation’s Largest Organic Dairy Violates Organic Rules
On April 16, 2007, Aurora Organic Dairy, the largest organic milk producer in the country, and supplier of organic milk to Walmart , Target , Costco , Safeway and many other large stores, received a notice of proposed revocation from the USDA for willful violations of the 1990 Organic Foods Production Act. The revocation letter from the USDA described 14 violations committed by Aurora Organic Dairy and stated: "Due to the nature and extent of these violations, the NOP proposes to revoke Aurora Organic Dairy’s production and handling certifications under the NOP." According to the Cornucopia Institute, a farm policy research group, the practices of Aurora are "a ’horrible aberration’ and that the vast majority of all organic dairy products are produced with high integrity." [88] [89]
August 21, 2007 - FTC Affirms the Legality of ‘rBST Free’ Labels on Milk
In February 2007, the Monsanto Corporation (producers of rBST) filed a complaint with the Federal Trade Commission alleging that a number of milk processors were engaging in "false and deceptive" advertising by labeling their products as being free of the artificial growth hormone rBST and thereby inferring that milk from cows injected with the growth hormone is inferior. In its response to the compliant filed by the Monsanto Corporation the FTC wrote that its "staff agrees with FDA that food companies may inform consumers in advertising, as in labeling, that they do not use rBST." [90] [91]
2007-2008 - China’s Tainted Milk Scandal
"A Chinese court has condemned two men to death and sentenced a company boss to life for their roles in the production and sale of poisoned milk that killed at least six children and made almost 300,000 sick …
More than 50,000 infants were hospitalised with kidney problems after drinking Sanlu baby formula tainted with melamine, a chemical normally used to make plastics and fertiliser. Investigators said middlemen who bought milk from farmers and sold it on to dairies had watered it down and mixed it with the chemical, which creates the appearance of higher protein levels in quality tests …
Parents had contacted the company to complain as early as the end of 2007. But the scandal was not exposed until September 2008 …
The scandal led to the screening of more than 20m babies for kidney problems, officials have said. It triggered a spate of product bans or recalls around the world after melamine was detected in exports such as chocolate, yoghurt and sweets." [92]
January 8, 2008 - FDA Approves Cloned Milk for Human Consumption
The United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) released its 968 page report "Animal Cloning: A Risk Assessment,” and announced to the public that milk from cloned cows had been approved for human consumption.
In its January 15, 2008 press release announcing the report and its conclusions, the FDA wrote that "meat and milk from clones of cattle, swine, and goats, and the offspring of clones from any species traditionally consumed as food, are as safe to eat as food from conventionally bred animals.” [93]
August 3, 2011 - Market in Venice, CA Raided by Police for Selling Raw Milk; Three Arrested
"The owner of a Venice health food market and two other people were arrested on charges related to the allegedly unlawful production and sale of unpasteurized dairy products … The arrests of James Cecil Stewart, Sharon Ann Palmer and Eugenie Bloch on Wednesday marked the latest effort in a government crackdown on the sale of so-called raw dairy products. Prosecutors in Los Angeles alleged that Stewart, 64, operates a Venice market called Rawesome Foods through which he illegally sold dairy products that did not meet health standards because they were unpasteurized … Palmer, 51, has operated Healthy Family Farms in Santa Paula since 2007 without the required licensing for milk production, prosecutors allege. She and her company face nine charges related to the production of unpasteurized [raw] milk products. Bloch, a Healthy Family Farms employee, is charged with three counts of conspiracy." [94] [95]
March 2012 - U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Release Report on Dangers of Raw Milk
In March, 2012, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) released a report titled "Nonpasteurized Dairy Products, Disease Outbreaks, and State Laws - United States, 1993-1996," which concluded: "Public health officials at all levels should continue to develop innovative methods to educate consumers and caregivers about the dangers associated with nonpasteurized dairy products. State officials should consider further restricting or prohibiting the sale or distribution of nonpasteurized dairy products within their states. Federal and state regulators should continue to enforce existing regulations to prevent distribution of nonpasteurized dairy products to consumers. Consumption of nonpasteurized dairy products cannot be considered safe under any circumstances." [96]
February 24, 2014 - "Got Milk?" Advertising Campaign Dropped, Replaced with "Milk Life"
"Got Milk? Not anymore. The Milk Processor Education Program is sidelining the iconic ad slogan in favor of a new tagline, ’Milk Life,’ which puts emphasis on milk’s nutritional benefits, including its protein content. The change is part of a national campaign launching Monday [February 24, 2014] that seeks to return the sluggish dairy milk category to growth … Protein is ’really in the news and on consumer’s minds,’ said Julia Kadison, interim CEO of MilkPEP. ’But a lot of people don’t know that milk has protein, so it was very important to make that connection between milk and protein’ … The nutritional pitch is a very different positioning from the original concept that spurred the creation of ’Got Milk,’ which was to dramatize situations in which consumers suffer without milk to accompany foods like cake and cookies." [97]
2015 - U.S. Sales of Dairy Milk Fall as Non-Dairy Milk Sales Rise
"Driven by negative health perceptions, reduced retail prices and exports and a growing number of non-dairy alternatives, the US dairy milk market has declined in recent years, as new research from Mintel reveals that sales of dairy milk decreased 7 percent in 2015 ($17.8 billion) and are projected to drop another 11 percent through 2020. Seen as a better-for-you (BFY) alternative to dairy milk, non-dairy milk offerings continue to see strong growth, with gains of 9 percent in 2015 to reach $1.9 billion." [98]
June 1, 2016 - Australian Regulators Approve Cold-Pressure Processing as Alternative to Pasteurization
"Unpasteurised milk will appear on shop shelves this week [June 1, 2016], with the food regulator declaring cold pressure as an effective method to kill the harmful bacteria lurking inside.
Sydney company Made by Cow has obtained the approval of the NSW Food Authority to use cold pressure as an alternative to conventional heat pasteurisation and sell ’cold-pressed raw milk’ … ‘Good herd management, hygienic milking techniques and the cold pressure method have meant we can put 100 per cent safe, raw milk onto supermarket shelves,’ said [company founder] Mr Joye.’The bottles of milk are placed under enormous water pressure, squashed in about 15 per cent, to remove the harmful micro-organisms.’
Selling raw milk for human consumption is illegal in Australia because it contains micro-organisms that can increase the risk of contracting serious illnesses… [but] while the product is labelled ’cold-pressed raw milk’, the NSW Food Authority says it doesn’t recognise it as raw milk because it has undergone ’high pressure processing’ to eliminate pathogens. It worked with Made by Cow for more than a year to ensure the product was safe and suitable for human consumption." [99]
September 25, 2019 - Milk Residue Found in Prehistoric Baby Bottles
"Researchers have uncovered three ceramic, spouted vessels believed to be prehistoric baby bottles. They were found in child graves in Bavaria , two from an Iron Age cemetery dated between 450 and 800 BC and another from a Bronze Age necropolis dated between 800 and 1200 BC, according to a new study [published in the journal Nature ] … But for the first time, an analysis of three of these vessels revealed residue associated with animal milk, suggesting these bowls acted like baby bottles used during the weaning process … The residue contained palmitic and stearic fatty acids associated with animal fat, as well as short-chain fatty acids that are rarely detected in old pottery, according to the study. These acids are usually associated with fresh milk fat. Isotopic analysis also revealed that breast milk was potentially mixed with dairy milk. The researchers believe the animal milk used came from domesticated cattle, goats or sheep. This suggests that the children were being fed animal milk instead of breast milk or being weaned off of breast milk." [100]
January 6, 2020 - Two Largest American Dairy Companies File for Bankruptcy
"Borden Dairy Co., one of America’s oldest and largest dairy companies, on Monday [January 6, 2020] became the second major milk producer to file for bankruptcy in the last two months.
Tumbling milk consumption combined with the rising price of milk have crippled the dairy industry with debt. Dean Foods, America’s largest milk producer, filed for bankruptcy November 12 [2019] …
The company said it also has been hurt by broader industry trends, including a 6 percent drop in overall US milk consumption since 2015. Borden noted that more than 2,700 family dairy farms went out of business last year, and 94,000 have stopped producing milk since 1992.” [101]
April 2020 - Dairy Farmers to Dump up to 3.7 Million Gallons of Milk per Day Due to COVID-19 Pandemic
Due to school and restaurant closures during the COVID-19 (coronavirus) pandemic, demand for milk has dropped sharply. Low demand, combined with processing bottlenecks and grocery store ordering caps, has forced milk farmers to dump milk before it is delivered to processors. Slowing milk production now instead of dumping could result in dairy shortages after the COVID-19 pandemic is over. Zoey Nelson, a sixth-generation dairy farmer, stated, "You can’t shut down cows. You can’t turn them off like a faucet. Just to see it [milk] going down the drain — it’s devastating." The Dairy Farmers of America estimate between 2.7 and 3.7 million gallons of excess milk could be dumped daily. [102] [103]
2022 - Number of American Dairy Farms Dropped 95 Percent Since 1970
In 1970, there were over 648,000 American dairy farms. By 2022, that number had fallen to just 24,470. Elizabeth Eckelkamp, associate professor of animal science at the University of Tennessee, offers a few reasons for the dramatic drop—one being that Americans are drinking far less dairy milk; and another being that the cost of producing milk exceeds the profit:
From 2005 to 2020, milk sales income per 100 pounds of milk produced ranged from $11.54 to $29.80, with an average price of $18.57. For that same period, the total costs to produce 100 pounds of milk ranged from $11.27 to $43.88, with an average cost of $25.80. On average, that meant a single cow that produced 24,000 pounds of milk brought in about $4,457. Yet, it cost $6,192 to produce that milk, meaning a loss for the dairy farmer. [41]
January 8, 2025 - Study Shows Increasing Milk Consumption May Lower Risk of Colorectal Cancer
The study found that increasing milk consumption by 244 grams (about a large glass) lowers the risk of bowel cancer by 17 percent, independent of other dietary and lifestyle factors. Why milk lowers the risk is unclear but it may be due to calcium, vitamin D, lactose, and conjugated linoleic acid, all of which have anti-cancer effects. [42]