Table of Contents Ask the Chatbot
Below is a sampling of institutions that have cited ProCon and its many resources.
United States Senate
A July 6, 2022 , letter to President Joe Biden, Attorney General Merrick Garland, and Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services Xavier Becerra from Senators Elizabeth Warren, Bernie Sanders, Ed Markey, Kirsten Gillibrand, Ron Wyden, and Cory Booker cites ProCon’s “State-by-State Medical Marijuana Laws.”
The New York Times
Jonathan Schulman , a fourth-grade teacher and the debate team coach at Public School 110, the Monitor School, in Brooklyn, cites ProCon as one of the “trusted websites” he makes available to students “to provide evidence for both sides of the issue.”
Natalie Proulx and Katherine Schulten ask, “Which candidate do you support? Though some of the quizzes below were created when the field was much larger, answering their questions can still help you think through where you stand on key issues:…ProCon.org: 2020 Presidential Election Candidate Quiz—Find Your Match!” and “For a side-by-side comparison of [the candidates’] statements and stances on key issues, check out ProCon.”
Jeremy Engle and Michael Gonchar write, “Want to find out more about the Electoral College—its origins and evolution, its advantages and disadvantages?…The Electoral College: Top 3 Pros and Cons | Britannica’s ProCon.org.”
Gonchar likewise writes, “The most comprehensive tool for researching the candidate’s stance on issues is the nonpartisan nonprofit ProCon.org. The site provides quotations from Mr. Obama, Mr. Romney and the major third party candidates on more than 60 issues.”
Return on Trust Newsletter
Doogie Levine says, “Dedicated to presenting both sides of controversial issues fairly and unbiasedly, ProCon.org offers detailed analyses of key policy topics likely to be debated in the 2024 elections. Whether you’re interested in healthcare, immigration, climate change, or any other issue, ProCon.org provides well-researched information to help you make informed decisions.”
GettingSmart.com
Nate McClennen and Mason Pashia note, “New technologies like deepfakes and generative ai are already challenging our level of awareness and ability to trace things back to a source. Young people must be instilled with a foolproof barometer for truth as they navigate the challenging landscape of information, propaganda and content. Sites like ProCon.org are leading the charge of creating trusted sources for big topics.”
BBC
Sydney Finkelstein explains, “The consequences of living in our algorithm-enabled straightjackets are not trivial. Intellectually and socially, we are paying a price….There are also websites and apps that can help. Procon.org, for example, presents opposing arguments to controversial issues.”
National Council for the Social Studies
C. Frederick Risinger calls ProCon “an absolutely ‘must have’ site in every teacher’s bookmark/favorites list.”
Risinger also says, “If you don’t check out any other site in this column, check out” ProCon.
The Journal
As Common Sense Education explains in The Journal , “With so much misleading, biased and inaccurate information in the news, ProCon.org is a welcome gold mine of objective content that promotes independence and critical thinking.”
The Christian Science Monitor
Gloria Goodale interviewed then ProCon CEO Kamy Akhavan, who explained that 36% of ProCon readers changed their minds about an issue after using the website.
Education World
Kassondra Granata says, “Educators appreciate ProCon.org’s ability to develop critical thinking skills by presenting both sides of key social issues such as Obamacare, alternative energy, illegal immigration, gay marriage and more.”
On Board , a publication of the New York State School Boards Association
The article quotes John McCarthy , a social studies teacher in Batavia City School District in Genesee county: “A lot of kids don’t have an opinion on topics.…[ProCon] gets the ball rolling to think about the issues. This is a website with facts. Hopefully they’ll remember it when they go to college.”
Forbes
Ralph Benko says, “ProCon.org is a resource for the engaged citizen seeking out both sides of issues….Wikipedia, watch your back: ProCon is sneaking up on you. ProCon recently opened up an impressively presented section on the renewed gold standard debate.”
Education Week
Amy Wickner says ProCon, which is “devoted to gathering reliable information to support both sides of controversial issues, gets in the game with Tablets vs. Textbooks, a newly launched ‘issue site’ that aims to promote ‘critical thinking, education, and informed citizenship’ by laying out reasoning for and against widespread tablet use in schools in a ‘straightforward, nonpartisan, primarily pro-con format.’ ”
Los Angeles Times
Mary Forgione notes, “If you don’t have a position on medical marijuana, fine. But check out ProCon.org’s exercise in rational exploration of the topic. It’s enlightening.”
USA Today Network
Cheryl McCloud links to ProCon’s daylight saving debate and asks, “What are the top reasons for and against daylight saving time?”
Kimberly Barrett says, “We all need to step out of our comfort zones. Visit websites like Allsides and ProCon.org which give the facts related to positions taken on important issues from the right, left and center of our political spectrum.”
Tom Tozer and Bill Black explain, “Your conversation [with a teen] might benefit from several resources: ProCon is a…nonpartisan organization that relates all sides of more than 50 issues.”
Slate
Chris Berdik offers resources for teachers: “One option is ProCon.org, an online compendium of capsule arguments for and against everything from school uniforms to the minimum wage.”
Popular Science
Brett Zarda says, “Every issue has two sides and at ProCon they offer the pros and cons to each. From politics to prostitution to the death penalty, the non-partisan nonprofit organization has invited experts to offer their unbiased, differing, opinions on controversial issues since 2004.”
Select medical journal articles citing ProCon
Food & Science Nutrition : Moustafa Salaheldin Abdelhamid et al., “ Zingiber officinale Extract Maximizes the Efficacy of Simvastatin as a Hypolipidemic Drug in Obese Male Rats”
: Moustafa Salaheldin Abdelhamid et al., “
Extract Maximizes the Efficacy of Simvastatin as a Hypolipidemic Drug in Obese Male Rats”
Journal of Genetic Counseling : Rebecca C. Candlish et al., “Exploring Canadian Genetic Counselors’ Perspectives and Experiences with Discussing Medical Assistance in Dying (MAiD)”
: Rebecca C. Candlish et al., “Exploring Canadian Genetic Counselors’ Perspectives and Experiences with Discussing Medical Assistance in Dying (MAiD)”
Frontiers in Sociology : Krittiya Kantachote, “Legal Violence: The Struggles of Thai Women in Thai Massage Businesses”
: Krittiya Kantachote, “Legal Violence: The Struggles of Thai Women in Thai Massage Businesses”
Annals of Long-Term Care : Kenneth R. Cohen, Zvi G. Loewy, and Martha M. Rumore, “End-of-Life Care: Law, Ethical Principles, and Jewish Medical Ethics”
: Kenneth R. Cohen, Zvi G. Loewy, and Martha M. Rumore, “End-of-Life Care: Law, Ethical Principles, and Jewish Medical Ethics”
Harm Reduction Journal : Ryan D. Assaf et al., “Associations of U.S. State-Level COVID-19 Policies Intensity with Cannabis Sharing Behaviors in 2020”
: Ryan D. Assaf et al., “Associations of U.S. State-Level COVID-19 Policies Intensity with Cannabis Sharing Behaviors in 2020”
BMC Public Health : Emilie Bruzelius and Silvia S. Martins, “Recreational Cannabis Legalization and Immigration Enforcement: A State-Level Analysis of Arrests and Deportations in the United States, 2009–2020”
: Emilie Bruzelius and Silvia S. Martins, “Recreational Cannabis Legalization and Immigration Enforcement: A State-Level Analysis of Arrests and Deportations in the United States, 2009–2020”
Injury Epidemiology : Thea Clare Leavitt, Stanford Chihuri, and Guohua Li, “State Cannabis Laws and Cannabis Positivity Among Fatally Injured Drivers”
: Thea Clare Leavitt, Stanford Chihuri, and Guohua Li, “State Cannabis Laws and Cannabis Positivity Among Fatally Injured Drivers”
Journal of Dairy Science : Jessiele Barbosa Costa et al., “Immobilization of the β-Galactosidase Enzyme by Encapsulation in Polymeric Matrices for Application in the Dairy Industry”
: Jessiele Barbosa Costa et al., “Immobilization of the β-Galactosidase Enzyme by Encapsulation in Polymeric Matrices for Application in the Dairy Industry”