Amid the Black Lives Matter protests following the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis , Minnesota , on May 25, 2020, calls to “defund the police ” began to populate protest signs and social media posts.
Although there are multiple interpretations of “defund the police,” the basic definition is “to move funding away from police departments and into community resources, such as mental health experts, housing, and social workers.” Some advocates would reallocate some police funding while keeping police departments, whereas others would combine defunding with other police reforms, such as body cameras and bias training, and others see defunding as a small step toward ultimately abolishing police departments and the prison system entirely. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6]
What do you think?
Explore the ProCon debate
Police departments received about $129 billion nationwide in 2020 from state and local governments, up from $42.3 billion in 1977. Police budgets have made up about 4% of total state and local budgets since 1977. According to the Urban Institute, “From 1977 to 2020, in 2020 inflation-adjusted dollars, state and local government spending on the police increased from $45 billion to $129 billion, an increase of 189 percent.” Individual cities or counties may allocate more (or fewer) funds to police departments. The 2017 Los Angeles city budget, for example, provided 23% of the budget to police, while 9% of Los Angeles county’s budget went to policing. About 97% of police budgets go toward operational costs, such as salaries and benefits. [7] [8] [9] [61]
In June 2020, 64% of Americans opposed the abstract idea of defunding the police, whereas 34% supported the movement; 60% were against reallocating police budget funds to other public health and social programs, whereas 39% were in favor. [10]
In Oct. 2021, 21% of American adults wanted police budgets “increased a lot,” and 26% wanted budgets “increased a little,” whereas 9% wanted police budgets “decreased a little” and 6% “decreased a lot”; 37% said budgets should “stay about the same.” [58]
In his March 1, 2022, State of the Union address , President Joe Biden declared, “We should all agree: The answer is not to defund the police. It’s to fund the police. Fund them. Fund them. Fund them with resources and training.” By Aug. 31, 2022, the movement had largely gone quiet; indeed, opinion articles declared, “‘Defund the Police’ Is Dead.” [65] [62]
A March 2023 criminology study found that, although police departments have not been widely defunded, the departments are experiencing a 2.2%–16% loss of full-time police officers. The loss has prompted some departments, including the New Orleans Police Department, to use third-party organizations to respond to some 911 calls, including minor traffic accidents. As explained by Ethan Cheramie, founder of On Scene Services (OSS), which hires former police officers as unarmed responders, “Citizens still call 911; their call is still dispatched. However, it is dispatched to our agents….You’re going to continue to see alternative police response be divested from guys with guns over to civilians to respond to these nonviolent calls for service.” [59] [60]
Pro 1: Police departments are oppressive and violent; defunding them would reduce violence against people of color and overall crime.
Paige Fernandez, policing policy adviser for the ACLU (American Civil Liberties Union), noted, “American policing has never been a neutral institution. The first U.S. city police department was a slave patrol, and modern police forces have directed oppression and violence at Black people to enforce Jim Crow, wage the War on Drugs, and crack down on protests.” Police departments are also often outfitted with surplus military equipment, increasing police firepower and the attitude that the police are at war with communities, which can escalate situations to violence. [11] [12]
Organizations such as MPD150, which surveyed the Minneapolis Police Department’s conduct since its inception in 1867, argue that the police system is actually not broken; it’s working as it always has, because “the police were established to protect the interests of the wealthy, and racialized violence has always been part of the mission.” MPD150 states that the police system puts millions of people of color in prison, which limits or deprives them of voting rights, employment, education, and access to housing, among other privileges given automatically to white people. [13]
According to an Aug. 20, 2019 study, Black American men are 2.5 times more likely to be killed by police than white men and Black women 1.4 times more likely than white women. A 2018 Bureau of Justice Statistics report showed that police officers were twice as likely to use force against people of color than against white people. In 2019 American police officers killed 1,098 people, 24% of whom were Black, though African Americans represented only 13% of the U.S. population. [14] [15] [16] [17]
The American Public Health Association declared police violence a public health issue in 2018, stating, “Almost 10 percent of all homicides in the US are committed by police. Even if some may be ‘lawful,’ it’s not ok that we kill 1,000–1,200 people a year by police.” [18]
Defunding the police could result in fewer crimes and less violence from police. During several weeks in 2014 and 2015, when New York City police pulled back on “broken windows” policing, which focused on actively patrolling for low-level crimes, about 2,100 fewer major crimes were reported, which represented a 3–6% drop in a matter of weeks. If the police are not actively patrolling for minor crimes and are responding to fewer major crimes, there are fewer opportunities for violence. [19]
Pro 2: Police department reforms have failed; police departments cannot be reformed, only curtailed.
As Mariame Kaba, a prison industrial complex abolitionist, has stated, “Enough. We can’t reform the police. The only way to diminish police violence is to reduce contact between the public and the police. There is not a single era in United States history in which the police were not a force of violence against black people.” [20]
Kaba has noted that the first major police misconduct investigation was the Lexow Committee in New York City in 1894, in which more than 100 officers were collectively convicted of 56 charges of third-degree assault, 45 charges of second-degree assault, as well as multiple charges of criminal neglect, oppression, and attempted rape. Only four officers were dismissed as a result, three because they’d assaulted other officers. [20] [21]
Philip V. McHarris, a Ph.D. candidate at Yale University, and Thenjiwe McHarris, from Movement for Black Lives, have highlighted “the Minneapolis Police Department, which is held up as a model of progressive police reform. The department offers procedural justice as well as trainings for implicit bias, mindfulness and de-escalation. It embraces community policing and officer diversity, bans ‘warrior style’ policing, uses body cameras, implemented an early intervention system to identify problematic officers, receives training around mental health crisis intervention, and practices ‘reconciliation’ efforts in communities of color.” [22]
Still, George Floyd and 51 other Black men, along with 15 Indigenous men and 9 Hispanic men, were killed by Minneapolis Police Department officers between Jan. 2000 and May 31, 2020. Further reforms have been recommended to the Minneapolis Police Department repeatedly to reduce use-of-force violations, but none have been implemented. [23] [24]
In July 2014 Eric Garner died from a choke hold performed by a police officer after New York City banned the hold in 1993. Austin, Texas, and Los Angeles police officers were shown firing projectiles at people’s heads, which is prohibited in both jurisdictions. Increased diversity on police forces did little to curb unnecessary police stops of people of color in Ferguson, Missouri, or Baltimore, Maryland. [25]
Two 2016 Harvard University studies found that anti-bias techniques meant to fight stereotypes reduced implicit bias for a few hours to a few days but not longer. Such training has little to no effect on racial bias in traffic stops or marijuana arrests. [26] [27]
Some researchers, including Stuart Schrader, an associate director of the Program in Racism, Immigration, and Citizenship at Johns Hopkins University, have argued that reforms are not wholly intended to change the departments for the better but rather are an excuse for the departments to maintain power and acquire a bigger budget. Reform programs come with more money and little accountability for police departments, continuing the historical cycle of oppression. [28]
Pro 3: Police were not intended to do many of the jobs they perform; defunding the police would allow experts to step in.
Police currently deal with calls about mental illness, homelessness, domestic disputes, barking dogs, neighbors playing loud music, and various other noncriminal activities on top of actual violations of the law, ranging from minor shoplifting by kids to speeding to murder.
In a 2016 interview, the former Dallas Police chief David Brown stated, “We’re just asking us to do too much. Every societal failure, we put it off for the cops to solve. That’s too much to ask. Policing was never meant to solve all those problems.” [2]
Alicia Garza, cofounder of Black Lives Matter, stated, “So much of policing right now is generated and directed towards quality-of-life issues, homelessness, drug addiction, domestic violence. What we do need is increased funding for housing, we need increased funding for education, we need increased funding for quality of life of communities who are over-policed and over-surveilled.” [29]
The people who respond to community issues should be those best equipped to deal with the concern, whether that person is a social worker attending a mental health crisis, an emergency medical technician arriving at a domestic dispute, or a housing facilitator helping an unhoused person. The activist Colin Kaepernick explains, “By abolishing policing and prisons, not only can we eliminate white supremacist establishments, but we can create space for budgets to be reinvested directly into communities to address mental health needs, homelessness and houselessness, access to education, and job creation as well as community-based methods of accountability.” [5] [63]
Greg Casar, an Austin, Texas, City Council member, stated, “We should be treating homelessness not with policing, but with housing. We should be treating addiction not with policing, but with treatment. We have dedicated so many of our public dollars simply to policing, and that hasn’t made us actually more safe.” [1]
Furthermore, defunding the police would allow more money to go to community programs that prevent the need for the police. Patrick Sharkey, a professor at Princeton University, has noted, “When neighborhood organizations engage young people with well-run after-school activities and summer jobs programs, those young people are dramatically less likely to become involved in violent activities. When street outreach workers intervene, they can be extremely effective in interrupting conflicts before they escalate. When local organizations reclaim abandoned lots and turn them into green spaces, violence falls. When community nonprofits proliferate across a city, that city becomes safer.” [30]
He adds, “If we ask community organizations and leaders to take over primary responsibility for creating a safe community, they should be given equivalent resources.” Defunding the police would free up budget funds to appropriately pay community organizations. [30]
Argues Annie Lowrey, staff writer for The Atlantic , “A more radical option…would mean ending mass incarceration, cash bail, fines-and-fees policing, the war on drugs, and police militarization, as well as getting cops out of schools. It would also mean funding housing-first programs, creating subsidized jobs for the formerly incarcerated, and expanding initiatives to have mental-health professionals and social workers respond to emergency calls.” [3]
According to A World Without Police, an abolitionist group, “Police violence stems not just from bad apples or bad attitudes, but from what police must be and do in America. The only way to stop the violence is to abolish the police, and transform the conditions that gave rise to them.” [57]
Con 1: When police department budgets are cut, violence and civilian injuries increase, and departments turn to “taxation by citation” to raise money.
Police officers in smaller jurisdictions, or those primarily populated by people of color, are frequently paid less. In Hillsdale, a suburb of St. Louis, Missouri, new officers earn $13.50 an hour after a probationary period—less than hourly workers at Target. Low wages force many officers to take extra jobs, leaving them tired and unprepared to deal with a high-stress police situation. David Harris, a University of Pittsburgh law professor, has stated, “We should not assume that the most poorly-paid cops are the worst cops. But the chances increase that you don’t attract the best officers.” [31] [32] [33]
During the 2008 recession many police departments were forced to cut officers as federal funding decreased. In Memphis, Tennessee, use-of-force complaints almost doubled as officers in an understaffed department were required to work overtime. [34]
In England and Wales 2010 police budgets were cut, resulting in 20,592 (14%) fewer officers in 2017 and 20% more gun, knife, and other serious violent crimes. Moreover, the homicide rate rose 39% from Mar. 2015 to 2019. In Mar. 2020 the British Home Office acknowledged a correlation and committed to hiring 20,000 officers. [35] [36]
The Illinois State Police director Jonathon Monken reported an increase in fatal car accidents due to a decrease in motorcycle traffic officers after 2010 budget cuts. In order to raise funds for the department, Monken implemented a policy wherein $15 for each citation (such as a speeding ticket) written goes to the state police. [37]
Called “citation taxation,” taking a cut of each citation written is a common police department fund-raising strategy. Such tickets often cost residents more than expected: a $100 traffic ticket cost a California resident $100 in state assessment fees, $70 in county assessment fees, $50 in court construction fees, $20 for emergency medical fees, among other fees, resulting in an almost $500 ticket for rolling through a red light. Though no one wants to pay a $500 traffic violation ticket, communities of color are especially hard-hit and ill-equipped to pay such tickets. [38]
Officers also write more tickets when department revenue is at stake. In St. Ann, a St. Louis suburb, the number of tickets almost tripled while the suburb’s population decreased. In New Miami Village, Ohio, 45,000 tickets were issued in 15 months to a population of about 2,000 people. If appropriately funded, the police could focus on crime rather than fundraising. [38]
Con 2: The level of police misconduct is overstated, more (not fewer) police are being called for in crime-ridden areas, and reforms are both possible and supported by a majority of Americans.
In Camden, New Jersey, the local police department was disbanded because of police corruption and rising crime rates. The county now runs the department, and it implemented de-escalation training, defined choke holds as deadly force, and required that officers step in if a colleague is using excessive force. Officers were tasked with patrolling on foot, introducing themselves to residents, and hosting community barbecues. Violent crime dropped 42% between 2012 and 2019. In comparison, the FBI estimates that, nationwide, violent crime fell 9% from 2009 to 2018. [39] [40]
Sam Sinyangwe, cofounder of We the Protestors, explained, “If you look at the 30 largest cities, police shootings have dropped about 30 percent, and some cities have seen larger drops. In some of these cities, like Chicago and Los Angeles, activists with Black Lives Matter and other groups have done a lot of work to push for de-escalation, stricter use-of-force policies and greater accountability.” [41]
Contrary to the publicly asserted “war” on Black people by white police officers, few are actually murdered by white officers each year. An analysis of the Philadelphia Police Department found that white officers were least likely to shoot an unarmed Black person, with a threat perception failure (TPF) rate of 5.2% with Black suspects. Black officers had an 11.4% rate, and Hispanic officers a 16.7% rate. [42]
According to a June 2020 poll, 82% of Americans agreed that police use of choke holds should be banned; 83% supported racial profiling bans; 92% agreed that the police should wear body cameras; 89% agreed on requiring officers to give their name, badge number, and a reason for the stop during police stops; 91% supported independent investigations of misconduct in departments; and 75% support allowing police misconduct victims to sue departments for damages. [43]
If police departments were reformed to focus on policing Black neighborhoods the same way they police wealthy white neighborhoods, police violence would decrease. Black neighborhoods suffer from underpolicing, as police officers focus on traffic and drug stops. [44]
Jill Leovy, the author of Ghettoside: A True Story of Murder in America , explains that the police focus “on nuisance and vice—the cheap and easy, low-hanging fruit of the trade,” whereas murders in predominantly Black neighborhoods go unsolved: “From 1988 to 2002, the number of unsolved homicides in the L.A. Police Department’s South Bureau was 41 per square mile. Even as many white neighborhoods remained untouched by killings during this period, some predomina[n]tly black ones had three unsolved cases per block—seven at the especially violent intersection of South San Pedro and East 84th streets.” [44]
Amid the George Floyd protests in May 2020, Chicago registered the city’s most deadly weekend in six decades: 110 shootings (85 wounded, 25 killed). Nearly all of the victims and shooters were Black. Michael Pfleger, a Roman Catholic priest and social activist on the South Side of Chicago, stated, “On Saturday and particularly Sunday, I heard people saying all over, ‘Hey, there’s no police anywhere, police ain’t doing nothing.’” [45]
Con 3: Police departments should not be disbanded but held to standardized national regulations, which should comply with international human rights laws.
President Barack Obama formed the President’s Task Force on 21st Century Policing after the Aug. 2014 police killing of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Missouri. The May 2015 final report suggested that the Department of Justice should “establish national benchmarks and best practices for federal, state, local, and tribal police departments,” among 58 other nationally standardized requirements. [46] [47]
The Equal Justice Initiative (EJI) has suggested many federal reforms, including ending the transfer of military equipment to police departments, a national comprehensive policy on use of force, a law banning lethal force, a requirement that police departments acknowledge their racial inequalities and injustices, mandatory racial bias training, and eliminating qualified immunity, which protects officers from being sued for wrongful death. EJI has stated that these reforms can help to “change the culture of policing to build trust, legitimacy, and accountability.” [48]
As Ed Pilkington, a chief U.S. reporter for The Guardian has explained, “The need for restrictions on police power has been recognized in international law for 40 years. Two basic human rights are involved: the right to life and personal security, and the right of freedom from discrimination. Those rights have also been enshrined in core United Nations standards. All 193 member nations of the UN, including the US, have signed up to a code of conduct for law enforcement officials adopted in 1979.” [49]
A review of police departments in 20 of the largest American cities in 2017 and 2018 found that “not one met the minimum standards established by human rights law.” No state had a human rights-compliant use-of-force law, only 12 cities had policies restricting use of force to an immediate threat, and only two cities, Los Angeles and Chicago, had the necessary external reporting requirements to meet international human rights standards. [50]
Data compiled by The Guardian found that 59 people in the U.S. were shot and killed by the police in the first 24 days of 2015, compared with 55 people fatally shot by the police in England and Wales in the past 24 years. In all, 97 people in the U.S. were fatally shot by police in Mar. 2015, compared with 94 in Australia between 1992 and 2011. [51]
As the author Will Saletan has summarized, “Across the political spectrum, there’s a consensus for requiring officers to wear body cameras, mandating independent investigations of officer-involved shootings, and creating a national registry of police misconduct records. By 2 to 1, the public supports banning chokeholds and no-knock search warrants. In a survey of more than 1,800 Americans, conducted in April and May by the Associated Press–NORC Center for Public Affairs Research, 60 percent of respondents said police supervisors should be penalized for racially biased conduct by their officers; only 15 percent disagreed.”
Police officers in other countries do not routinely carry guns, choke holds are banned, and use-of-force policies are stricter than in the United States. In Finland an officer must get supervisor approval before using deadly force, and in Spain officers must fire a warning shot or shoot a non-vital body part before using lethal force. Officers in Europe train for an average of three years, compared with about 19 months for Americans. These policies have resulted in fewer citizen deaths in those countries. [52]