Table of Contents Ask the Chatbot
Origins of Tax Exemption for Churches
The tax exemption for churches can be traced back to the Roman Empire , when Constantine , emperor of Rome from 306–337, granted the Christian church a complete exemption from all forms of taxation following his supposed conversion to Christianity circa 312. Church property used for religious purposes was tax-exempt in medieval England, based on the rationale that the church relieved the state of some governmental functions, and therefore deserved a benefit in return. The English Statute of Charitable Uses of 1601 , which included churches along with all other charitable institutions, formed the basis of America’s modern tax exemption for charities. [2] [3] [4] [45]
Early American History of Tax Exemption for Churches
By the time of the American Revolution , nine of the 13 original colonies were giving some kind of tax relief to churches. In 1777, Virginia officially enacted an exemption from paying property tax to “houses for divine worship.” New York followed in 1799, and Congress exempted all churches in D.C. from paying property tax in 1870. [2] [5] [48]
During the 19th century, opposition to churches retaining property tax exemptions was expressed by at least three U.S. presidents: James Madison , James Garfield , and Ulysses S. Grant . Grant submitted a 900-foot long petition containing 35,000 signatures to Congress in 1875, demanding “that churches and other ecclesiastical property shall be no longer exempt from taxation.” Grant told Congress that “in 1850, the church properties in the U.S. which paid no taxes, municipal or state, amounted to about $83 million. In 1860, the amount had doubled; in 1875, it is about $1 billion. By 1900, without check, it is safe to say this property will reach a sum exceeding $3 billion….so vast a sum, receiving all the protection and benefits of government without bearing its portion of the burdens and expenses of the same, will not be looked upon acquiescently by those who have to pay the taxes.” [24] [49] [50]
U.S. churches’ federal income tax exemption was not formerly enacted as legislation until the Tariff Act was passed by Congress in 1894, providing tax exemptions to “corporations, companies, or associations organized and conducted solely for charitable, religious, or educational purposes.” This was the first time the federal government declared any group exempt from paying taxes, as opposed to its earlier practice of only listing entities subject to taxation. Although the Tariff Act was declared unconstitutional in 1896, the church tax exemption was reinstated by the Revenue Act of 1913 , which defined the modern American income tax system. On Jan. 14, 1924, the U.S. Supreme Court interpreted the reason for the exemption in Trinidad v. Sagrada Orden : “Evidently the exemption is made in recognition of the benefit which the public derives” from churches’ “corporate activities.” [38] [45] [46] [47] [51]
501(c)(3) Charitable Organizations and the Parsonage Exemption
The U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS) classifies churches as 501(c)(3) nonprofit charitable organizations, which are exempt from federal income tax and are able to accept tax-deductible donations. Unlike secular charities, however, churches are automatically considered to be 501(c)(3) organizations, and, while they may do so voluntarily, they are not required by law to submit an application for exemption or pay the application fee. According to the IRS , the fees are $275 for form 1023-EZ and $600 for Form 1023 as of Jan. 20, 2023. [1] [67] [68]
In addition, using a benefit known as the “parsonage exemption” (or “parish exemption”), “licensed, commissioned, or ordained” ministers of religion may deduct most of the money they spend on housing from their federal income tax, and these properties are often exempt from state property taxes. The exemption has existed since 1921, and no equivalent tax break is available to leaders of secular nonprofit charities. A legal battle has ensued to determine whether the exemption can apply to multiple homes used by a single pastor. In Mar. 2011, a U.S. Tax Court ruled that Phil Driscoll, an ordained minister and Grammy Award –winning trumpeter imprisoned for tax evasion, was exempt from federal income tax on $408,638 used to purchase a second home near Cleveland , TN. The court determined that the word “home” used in the tax code is equivalent to “homes.” However, on Feb. 8, 2012 the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals in Atlanta overturned the earlier decision in a 3–0 ruling, stating that “Congress intended for the parsonage allowance exclusion to apply to only one home.” [41] [43] [44] [62] [65]
The Johnson Amendment and Political Campaigning
A ban on church intervention in political campaigns became law in 1954 with the passage of then-Senator Lyndon Johnson ’s amendment to Internal Revenue Code (IRC) section 501(c)(3), which covers tax-exempt charitable organizations in general. The amendment was passed with no recorded input from churches or any other charitable groups. Under the amended IRC, churches and all other 501(c)(3) charities are “absolutely prohibited from directly or indirectly participating in, or intervening in, any political campaign on behalf of (or in opposition to) any candidate for elective public office” if they are to remain tax-exempt. [IRC 8] Contributions to political campaign funds in support or opposition to candidates are also prohibited, but pastors may campaign as individuals without the imprimatur of the church, and churches may speak out on public issues so long as they don’t “devote a substantial part of their activities to attempting to influence legislation.” [1] [7] [52]
In practice, however, the IRS rarely investigates churches for violating the political campaign ban. The IRS has successfully used the Johnson Amendment to revoke the tax-exempt status of only one church since the law was enacted in 1954: the Church at Pierce Creek in Binghamton, NY. The church placed a full-page advertisement in USA Today and the Washington Times four days prior to the 1992 presidential election, listing some of Bill Clinton’s views on abortion, homosexuality, and the distribution of condoms to teenagers in public schools, and compared the views unfavorably with the Ten Commandments . The ad went on to ask, “How then can we vote for Bill Clinton?” and specified, in fine print at the bottom of the page: “This advertisement was co-sponsored by The Church at Pierce Creek…Tax-deductible donations for this advertisement gladly accepted.” [6] [7] [35]
Over the years, there have been several attempts to revoke the Johnson Amendment, though none have been successful. [69] [70]
President Donald Trump signed an executive order on May 4, 2017, titled “ Promoting Free Speech and Religious Liberty ,” which he says “directs the IRS not to unfairly target churches and religious organizations for political speech.” Trump stated, “No one should be censoring sermons or targeting pastors.” The executive order limits enforcement of the 1954 Johnson Amendment, which prohibits churches from campaigning for or against political candidates, but it does not yet “totally destroy” it as Trump had promised during his presidential campaign. According to the National Law Review , “It has been widely reported that the Johnson Amendment is not currently being enforced. In this light, the executive order is unlikely to have any practical effect.” [66]
U.S. Supreme Court Cases on Church Taxation
On May 4, 1970, the U.S. Supreme Court upheld property tax exemptions for churches, declaring them to be in accordance with the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. In the majority 8–1 opinion written by Chief Justice Warren E. Burger in Walz v. Tax Commission of the City of New York , the Court stated that the exemptions did not equate with “the ‘establishment’ of a religion [that] connoted sponsorship, financial support, and active involvement of the sovereign in religious activity,” all of which are prohibited. The Court also defended the tax benefit on the basis that churches “foster [the community’s] ‘moral or mental improvement.’” Furthermore, the court warned that taxing churches would be a violation of the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment, which bars government interference in religious affairs. [5] [53]
The 1983 U.S. Supreme Court case Regan v. Taxation with Representation of Washington upheld the 1954 Johnson Amendment barring churches (and other nonprofit charities) from receiving tax exemptions if they intervene in political campaigns. Then–Associate Justice William H. Rehnquist , on behalf of the unanimous Court, argued that the IRS is under no obligation to grant a tax benefit to lobbying organizations, and that the freedoms guaranteed by the First Amendment do not have to be sponsored by the federal government in the form of a tax break. [27]
Scientology, the Mormon Church, and Challenge to Tax Exemption
The Church of Scientology battled the IRS for 25 years to regain its tax exemption after the IRS withdrew it 1967, claiming the organization was a commercial enterprise rather than a church. The IRS decision was upheld by numerous courts, despite Scientology and its members bringing 2,200 lawsuits against the IRS and its officials over the course of the dispute. The New York Times revealed in Mar. 1997 that during Scientology’s campaign against the IRS, the organization’s lawyers had “hired private investigators to dig into the private lives of IRS officials and to conduct surveillance operations to uncover potential vulnerabilities.” [30] [54]
In 1991, Scientology’s ecclesiastical leader David Miscavige met with then–IRS Commissioner Fred T. Goldberg Jr. and offered to call off the group’s lawsuits in exchange for regaining its tax-exempt status. The New York Times argued that in agreeing to Miscavige’s proposal, Goldberg “created a special committee to negotiate a settlement with Scientology outside normal agency procedures” and that IRS “tax analysts were ordered to ignore the substantive issues in reviewing the decision,” according to IRS files. In order to receive the exemption, Scientology agreed to pay the IRS $12.5 million and “agreed to more Federal Government intrusion than perhaps any religious organization has ever allowed.” [30] [54]
In Nov. 2008, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (also called the Mormon Church) was accused of violating its tax-exempt status by supporting the passage of California’s Proposition 8, a ballot initiative outlawing civil marriages for same-sex couples. However, Americans United for Separation of Church and State (AU) Executive Director Barry W. Lynn explained that the Mormons “almost certainly have not violated their tax exemption. While the tax code has a zero tolerance for endorsements of candidates, the tax code gives wide latitude for churches to engage in discussions of policy matters and moral questions, including when posed as initiatives.” [55] [56]
On Oct. 12, 2011, Americans United for Separation of Church and State (AU) wrote to the IRS to report Pastor Robert Jeffress, who had posted a video of himself endorsing Texas Gov. Rick Perry on the First Baptist Church of Dallas website. The IRS did not respond. [57]
John Oliver and Last Week Tonight Revive the Debate
In the Aug. 17, 2015, episode of Last Week Tonight , comedian John Oliver lampooned the ease with which one can obtain IRS tax-exempt status for a religious organization. Following stories in Time Magazine by Mark Oppenheimer and in The Federalist by Denny Burk, Oliver amped up the debate by establishing his own “church,” Our Lady of Perpetual Exemption, registering the church with the IRS, and receiving tax-exempt status. Oliver asked his viewers for donations to the church, which he then donated to Doctors without Border s. He shut down the church on Sept. 13, 2015. [71]
Pros and Cons at a Glance
PROS
CONS
Pro 1: Exempting churches from taxation is constitutional and maintains a long American tradition. Read More.
Con 1: Exempting churches from taxation is unconstitutional. Read More.
Pro 2: Exempting churches from taxation contributes to the public good. Read More.
Con 2: Exempting churches from taxation forces taxpayers to subsidize religion, while costing the government billions in tax revenue. Read More.
Pro 3: Most churches follow the rules and would struggle to exist without the tax exemption. The IRS should enforce the rules rather than eliminating the tax exemption wholesale. Read More.
Con 3: Too many churches have taken advantage of the tax exemption by being politically active, being “sham” religions, or using the tax exemption to line the pockets of extravagantly wealthy faith leaders. Read More.
Pro 1: Exempting churches from taxation is constitutional and maintains a long American tradition.
Exempting churches from taxation upholds the separation of church and state embodied by the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution . The U.S. Supreme Court, in the May 4, 1970 majority opinion written by Chief Justice Warren E. Burger in Walz v. Tax Commission of the City of New York , stated: “The exemption creates only a minimal and remote involvement between church and state, and far less than taxation of churches. It restricts the fiscal relationship between church and state, and tends to complement and reinforce the desired separation insulating each from the other.” [5]
Requiring churches to pay taxes would endanger the free expression of religion and violate the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment of the US Constitution. By taxing churches, the government would be empowered to penalize them if they default on their tax payments. The U.S. Supreme Court confirmed this potential in McCulloch v. Maryland (1819) when it stated: “the power to tax involves the power to destroy.” [12] [13]
Further, a tax exemption for churches is not a subsidy to religion, and is therefore constitutional. As explained by Chief Justice Warren E. Burger, “The grant of a tax exemption is not sponsorship, since the government does not transfer part of its revenue to churches, but simply abstains from demanding that the church support the state. No one has ever suggested that tax exemption has converted libraries, art galleries, or hospitals into arms of the state or put employees ‘on the public payroll.’ There is no genuine nexus between tax exemption and establishment of religion.” [5]
The only constitutionally valid way of taxing churches would be to tax all nonprofits, which would place undue financial pressure on the public charities that aid and enrich society domestically and abroad. If only churches were taxed, government would be treating churches differently, purely because of their religious nature. [20] [21]
Besides, American churches have been tax-exempt for over 200 years, yet there are no signs that America has become a theocracy. If the tax exemption were a serious threat to the separation of church and state, the US government would have succumbed to religious rule long ago. As the Supreme Court ruled in Walz v. Tax Commission of the City of New York , “freedom from taxation for two centuries has not led to an established church or religion, and, on the contrary, has helped to guarantee the free exercise of all forms of religious belief.” [18]
Pro 2: Exempting churches from taxation contributes to the public good.
Churches earn their tax exemption by contributing to the public good through offering numerous social services to people in need, including soup kitchens, homeless shelters, after-school programs for poor families, and assistance to victims of domestic violence. These efforts relieve government of doing work it would otherwise be obliged to undertake. [14] [15]
Thus, poor and disadvantaged people relying on assistance from their local churches would suffer if churches were to lose their tax-exempt status. According to Vincent Becker, Monsignor of the Immaculate Conception Church in Wellsville, NY, the food and clothing programs his church offers would be threatened by a tax burden: “All of a sudden, we would be hit with something we haven’t had to face in the past….We base all the things that we do on the fact that we do not have to pay taxes on the buildings.” Crucial services would either be eliminated or relegated to cash-strapped local governments if churches were to lose their tax exemptions. [17]
Samuel Spector, Rabbi at Salt Lake City’s Congregation Kol Ami, speaks to the controversy about a few churches that are incredibly wealthy and considered to be taking advantage of their tax-exempt status to get richer. He explains, “I completely support it [tax-exempt status]….If another synagogue somewhere else gets a $20 million donation, that’s wonderful. But that doesn’t have any impact on us whatsoever. Without that tax-exemption status, we would be unable to provide those services [food banks, shelter, etc.] because as it is, we have to struggle to survive. More power to Latter-day Saints and other faith groups that are right now doing financially very well, but that is not the situation of your average rural church or your average synagogue.” [73]
Pro 3: Most churches follow the rules and would struggle to exist without the tax exemption. The IRS should enforce the rules rather than eliminating the tax exemption wholesale.
Small churches, already struggling to survive, would be further endangered by a new tax burden. A 2020 survey by the Hartford Institute for Religion Research found that the median income for churches was $120,000, down from $150,000 in 2010. However, 46% of churches have annual revenues of $100,000 or less. If these churches were obliged to pay taxes, their existence would be threatened and government would thus be impeding religious expression. [75]
Withdrawing the “parsonage exemption” on ministers’ housing would cost American clergy members $2.3 billion over five years, which would be a major blow to modestly paid people who dedicate their lives to helping people in need. According to the National Association of Church Business Administration (NACBA), the average American pastor with a congregation of 300 people earns less than $28,000 per year. The NACBA also states that one in five pastors takes on a second job to earn extra income, and that only 5% of pastors earn more than $50,000. D. August Boto, executive vice president and general counsel of the executive committee of the Southern Baptist Convention, explains, “the housing allowance is critically important for making ends meet—it is not a luxury.” [59] [60] [62]
Plus, the vast majority of churches refrain from political campaigning and should not be punished for the actions of the few that are political. The Internal Revenue Code (IRC) gives churches the freedom to either accept a tax benefit and refrain from political campaigning like all other nonprofit charities, or reject the exemption and speak freely about political candidates.
There are 450,000 churches in the US, yet only 500 pastors made political statements as part of Pulpit Freedom Sunday on Oct. 2, 2011. The tax exemption should remain in place to benefit the vast majority of churches, while the IRS should enforce the Johnson Amendment so churches not following the rules are no longer tax-exempt. [1] [23] [35] [58]
Pro Quotes
Samuel Spector, Rabbi at Salt Lake City’s Congregation Kol Ami, stated
“I completely support it [tax exempt status]….If another synagogue somewhere else gets a $20 million donation, that’s wonderful. But that doesn’t have any impact on us whatsoever. Without that tax-exemption status, we would be unable to provide those services [food banks, shelter, etc.] because as it is, we have to struggle to survive. More power to Latter-day Saints and other faith groups that are right now doing financially very well, but that is not the situation of your average rural church or your average synagogue.”
—Tony Semerad, “LDS Wealth Spurs Question: Should Churches Be Tax-Exempt?,” sltrib.com, Apr. 17, 2022
Reece Barker, JD candidate at J. Reuben Clark Law School, stated:
“Religious organizations’ tax-exempt status is a constitutional right rooted in the Religion Clauses of the First Amendment. The principles at the core of the Religion Clauses—as declared by James Madison in his Memorial and Remonstrance and supported by case law, statutory law, and historical practice—forbid federal, state, and local governments from levying income and property tax against religious organizations’ non-commercial income and property. This avoids intermingling of church and state, threatening free exercise, disadvantaging poor religions, America’s image as a land of religious liberty, and increasing disruptions and divisions in society. Recognition of this constitutional right avoids taxation, but it also calls for adjustments to some current tax-exempt law, specifically, narrowing the Johnson Amendment and the Bob Jones public policy standard. Further questions remain and will need to be addressed in this complicated and sensitive area. For instance, the definition and breadth of religious, non-commercial income and property need further clarification. This further clarification may expand or shrink the current tax benefits religious organizations receive, but the constitutional right to tax exemption dismisses once and for all the threat to tax the non-commercial property and income of religious groups.”
—Reece Barker, “A Memorial and Remonstrance against Taxation of Churches,” digitalcommons.law.byu.edu, Spring 2022
Steve Aeschbacher, interim pastor at First Presbyterian Church in Salt Lake City, stated
“[There is] incredible value to society from having healthy churches, including church buildings that are available…. All of those things [outreach to the community] wouldn’t be possible if we were taxed out of existence….I can’t imagine what our property taxes would be here. If we had to pay them, it might shut us down, which seems to raise some interesting constitutional problems. If effectively you’re stopping religion by taxing it, does that mean you’re infringing on freedom of religion?”
—Tony Semerad, “LDS Wealth Spurs Question: Should Churches Be Tax-Exempt?,” sltrib.com, Apr. 17, 2022
Con 1: Exempting churches from taxation is unconstitutional.
Tax exemptions for churches violate the separation of church and state enshrined in the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution . By providing a financial benefit to religious institutions, government is supporting religion. Associate Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court, William O. Douglas, in his May 4, 1970 dissenting opinion in Walz v. Tax Commission of the City of New York , stated: “If believers are entitled to public financial support, so are nonbelievers. A believer and nonbeliever under the present law are treated differently because of the articles of their faith…I conclude that this tax exemption is unconstitutional.” [24]
The Constitution bars government from subsidizing religion. However, providing a tax exemption to churches subsidizes religion. William H. Rehnquist, Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court, declared in 1983 on behalf of a unanimous court in Reagan v. Taxation with Representation : “Both tax exemptions and tax deductibility are a form of subsidy that is administered through the tax system. A tax exemption has much the same effect as a cash grant to the organization of the amount of tax it would have to pay on its income.” [27]
Further, the tax exemption means churches receive special treatment from the IRS beyond what other nonprofits receive, and such favoritism is unconstitutional. While secular charities are compelled to report their income and financial structure to the IRS using Form 990 (Return of Organization Exempt From Income Tax), churches are granted automatic exemption from federal income tax without having to file a tax return every year. Even some who support tax exemption believe that churches should have to participate in the same financial transparency as other nonprofits. Reverend Frank Benson Jones of Stop The Prosperity Preachers argues that requiring churches to file a 990 requirement is a good step toward discovering and eliminating financial abuse: “I am calling upon all Americans to insist on full financial disclosure by churches and religious organizations, and the first step towards full disclosure is to insist that churches and religious organizations file an IRS form 990.” [1] [72]
And, finally, the tax break given to churches restricts their freedom of speech because it deters religious leaders from speaking out for or against political candidates. Carl Gregg, pastor of Maryland’s Broadview Church, argues, “when Christians speak, we shouldn’t have to worry about whether we are biting the hand that feeds us because we shouldn’t be fed from Caesar/Uncle Sam in the first place.” [1] [37]
Con 2: Exempting churches from taxation forces taxpayers to subsidize religion, while costing the government billions in tax revenue.
A tax break for churches forces all American taxpayers to support religion, even if they oppose some or all religious doctrines. As Mark Twain argued: “No church property is taxed and so the infidel and the atheist and the man without religion are taxed to make up the deficit in the public income thus caused.” [26]
Tax exemptions to secular nonprofits are justified because such organizations do work that would otherwise fall to government. Churches, while they may undertake charitable work, exist for religious worship and instruction, which the U.S. government is constitutionally prevented from performing. [13]
Exempting churches from taxation costs federal, state, and local governments billions of dollars in lost revenue, which they cannot afford, especially in tough economic times. According to former White House senior policy analyst Jeff Schweitzer, American churches own $300–$500 billion in untaxed property. New York’s nonpartisan Independent Budget Office determined in July 2011 that New York City alone loses $627 million in property tax revenue. Lakewood Church, a “megachurch” in Houston, TX, earns $75 million in annual untaxed revenue, and the Church of Scientology’s annual income exceeds $500 million. [9] [11] [32] [33]
Even Jared Walczak, vice president of State Projects at the Tax Foundation, working to debunk the viral meme that the government is missing out on $76 billion to $85 billion in tax revenue, estimates “$11.6 billion in taxable income (neglecting deductions or exemptions), which would generate $2.4 billion in federal tax liability.” [74]
Con 3: Too many churches have taken advantage of the tax exemption by being politically active, being “sham” religions, or using the tax exemption to line the pockets of extravagantly wealthy faith leaders.
Despite the 1954 law banning political campaigning by tax-exempt groups, many churches are clearly political. Every fall, the Alliance Defense Fund, a Christian legal group, organizes “Pulpit Freedom Sunday,” encouraging pastors to endorse candidates from the pulpit and none have suffered consequences. Minnesota pastor Brad Brandon of Berean Bible Baptist Church endorsed several Republican candidates and dared the “liberal media” to file complaints with the IRS. Brandon later announced: “I’m going to explain to you what happened…Nothing happened.” [9] [34] [35]
The tax code makes no distinction between authentic religions and fraudulent start-up “faiths.” In Mar. 2004, the IRS warned of an increase in schemes that “exploit legitimate laws to establish sham one-person, nonprofit religious corporations” charging $1,000 or more per person to attend “seminars.” [28] [29] [30]
American taxpayers are supporting the extravagant lifestyles of wealthy pastors, whose lavish “megachurches” accumulate millions of tax-free dollars every year. U.S. Senator Chuck Grassley (Republican, Iowa) launched an investigation into these groups in Nov. 2007 after receiving complaints of church revenue being used to buy pastors private jets, Rolls Royce cars, multimillion-dollar homes, trips to Hawaii and Fiji, and in one case, a $23,000, marble-topped chest of drawers installed in the 150,000 square foot headquarters of Joyce Meyer Ministries in Fenton, Missouri. The average annual salary for senior pastors with congregations of 2,000 or more is $147,000, with some earning up to $400,000. In addition to the federal exemption on housing expenses enjoyed by these ministers, they often pay zero dollars in state property tax. Church leaders Creflo and Taffi Dollar of World Changers Church International had three tax-free parsonages: a million-dollar Georgia mansion, a two-million-dollar Georgia mansion, and a $2.5 million Manhattan apartment. Kenneth and Gloria Copeland, leaders of Kenneth Copeland Ministries in Fort Worth, TX, live in a church-owned, tax-free $6.2 million lakefront parsonage. [36] [61] [62] [64]