May 15 – September 25, 2025
A seasonal staple for thousands of Downtown visitors, residents, and workers, the Farmers Market is a unique and exciting shopping experience that showcases over 50 local farmers and vendors, as well as the region’s finest small-batch wine & spirit producers.
May 11 – October 14, 2025
Pittsburgh’s favorite public yoga series brings some of the city’s best instructors for two free weekly classes in Downtown Pittsburgh.
June 21 – October 25 , 2025
Burgh Bazaar brings an awesome outdoor pop-up shopping market and festival to Downtown every third Saturday, featuring Pittsburgh’s most creative independent vendors. Clothing, furniture, candles, food, drinks, and more are exhibited in this monthly series.
June – October, 2025
Over the summer, this iconic urban park is filled with daily activations, from pop-up events, Paint & Sip classes and salsa dancing, to daily lunchtime concerts & elevated happy hours!
June – October, 2025
U.S. Steel Plaza offers unique outdoor oasis to take your workday and post-work plans to the next level. Plus, enjoy the Steel Garden, activated by Brew Gentlemen, with food trucks and live music throughout the week.
June 27 – 29, 2025
Held in June, Market Square becomes a showcase for businesses, artists, makers, performers, food purveyors, and more from across the various international and newcomer communities.
July 11 – 13, 2025
The destination for all-things-pickled! Picklesburgh is the annual celebration that goes beyond the dill pickle to bring unique eats, food demonstrations, children’s activities, live music, and more to the heart of Downtown Pittsburgh. The best part? There really is a giant flying pickle.
Highmark Light Up Night® is the official start of the holiday season in Pittsburgh! Begin your holiday celebration with high-quality entertainment, free concerts, tree-lighting ceremonies, food trucks, magic, and more all through the Golden Triangle.
Experience a one-of-a-kind shopping village as you stroll through an illuminated Market Square, weaving through wooden chalets brimming with high-quality gifts that you won’t find anywhere else. Plus, enjoy live music, a seasonal karaoke contest, and more.
Along with Highmark Light Up Night and the Peoples Gas Holiday Market, Downtown Pittsburgh hosts a range of programming for the whole family throughout the holiday season. With Santa’s House and Holiday KidsPlay, plus the best holiday shopping in ‘tahn, experience the most magical time of the year right here in the Golden Triangle.
Developed in 2013, the Downtown Activation + Public Art initiative is a multi-year effort to enhance the Downtown neighborhood through public art events, creating thoughtful and innovative programming that enlivens unique areas throughout Downtown Pittsburgh.