Supporting the things you love should be as easy as enjoying your favorite melody. Join Ostinato today to play your part in our music.
Ostinatos appear throughout music as the repeated patterns that make you love a song so much. Ostinatos provide a solid platform for the rest of the song to soar, and ground the piece while adding the reliable beat you know and love. Ostinato is the Pittsburgh Symphony’s monthly giving program, where you can provide that steady foundation that allows the PSO to flourish in our community. You can now support the PSO automatically each month just like your favorite subscription service, except with us, the whole community benefits. Did you know that for every $1 you give to the PSO, that generates $4 for the Pittsburgh community? That’s an incredible impact that is felt immediately, especially with the support of our monthly donors. Gifts of all sizes from our generous donors cover 75% of the PSO’s yearly budget. To put it simply, we only achieve what we do because of your support. By becoming a monthly donor, you get to make an impact all year long. Just sign up once and your gift will be made automatically each month. Not only does this help you save money in the short term, but you can also receive special donor perks for your total yearly giving amount, so that you benefit immediately just like we do. And if something changes, you can contact us to update your monthly gift amount or cancel at any time.
Join the Beat
Frequently Asked Questions
Is it actually that simple to sign up or make changes?
Yes! To sign up, all you need to do is fill out our monthly giving form and you’re all set. If you would like extra assistance, simply contact our Development Department at 412.392.4880 or pso_development@pittsburghsymphony.org .
Can I make changes on my own?
Absolutely! You can access your donation account through the link in your gift confirmation email. Once you’re logged in, you can change your credit card information or cancel your current monthly donation. If you want to change your donation amount, cancel your current monthly donation and then fill out the sign-up form with the new amount.
Our team is always here to help if you run into questions. You can reach out to us at 412.392.4880 or pso_development@pittsburghsymphony.org .
Does it matter what exact amount I give? I see you offer certain monthly giving amounts.
The amount you wish to give is entirely up to you. We offer some standard amounts for you to choose from that coincide with our donor levels and benefits . Remember, our monthly donors and receive immediate recognition and benefits for their total yearly giving amount. So if you give only $11 each month, you will be recognized in our Rhapsody Club donor level that starts at $125/year, and you receive access to those benefits immediately.
If you’re not concerned about aligning your gift amount with a certain donor level, you can simply choose the “Other Amount” box with whatever amount you wish to give.
How does the timing of monthly giving work?
The date you first sign up for monthly giving is the date you will be automatically charged every month. So if you sign up on the 3rd, your first gift will be processed on that date and monthly gifts afterwards will be automatically charged on the 3rd of every month.
What if I want to decline any benefits so that my gift is fully tax deductible?
No problem! When you fill out the sign-up form, there’s a box you can check to decline any benefits.
Will I receive confirmation of my gift each month?
You will receive an automatic email receipt for every donation each month. At the start of each calendar year, you will also receive a summary letter detailing your total yearly support.
Our Development team is always happy to answer any questions you may have. Give us a call at 412.392.4880 or email us at pso_development@pittsburghsymphony.org .