Volunteer with PSO Learning and Engagement
PSO Learning and Engagement programs reach our youngest music lovers all
      the way up to the aspiring and inspiring musicians of tomorrow. The
      Pittsburgh Symphony is currently accepting volunteers for our three core
      Learning programs: Fiddlesticks Musical Exploration, Schooltime @ Heinz
      Hall and Student Side-by-Side.
Ready to Volunteer?
Sign Up Here!
Interactive family concerts that introduce orchestral music and
                concepts to children ages 3-8.
Volunteer Duties
•    Help in pre-concert activity spaces to
                promote interaction and answer questions
•    Greet guests
•    Hand out activity books
•    Direct guests around Heinz
                Hall
The PSO’s widest-reaching learning program that impacts
                21,000+ K-12 students from 160 schools annually.
Volunteer Duties
•    Assist with checking in registered
                school groups
•    Locate school buses
•    Direct groups during dismissal
Immersive 8-week instrumental program for students in grades
                9-12 that culminates in a concert at Heinz Hall on stage with
                the PSO.
Volunteer Duties
•    Assist during the post-concert jazz
                and dessert reception.
•    Please note that volunteers will be
                required to arrive before the concert to receive training. A
                comp ticket with be provided.
Learn More
Frequently Asked Questions
How old do I need to be to volunteer?
Volunteers must be 18 or older. If you are under 18, please have a
      parent/guardian contact Amy Cale at acale@pittsburghsymphony.org for additional details and a consent form.
Is training provided?
Volunteer training is provided before all PSO Learning and Engagement
      programs.
Is parking provided?
Volunteers are responsible for arranging their own transportation and
      parking costs.
Are accommodations available?
The PSO is committed to making sure that every volunteer has what they need to
  have a successful experience. Please contact Amy Cale, Program Manager, at
  
  to discuss any accommodations needed .