Entrance Security Policy All audience members are required to enter through state-of-the-art scanning equipment, designed both to enhance security and convenience. Heinz Hall selected a “free-flow” system which allows patrons to simply walk through unimpeded. There will be no need to remove coats or bags; cell phones and keys can remain in your pockets. Patrons using wheelchairs and mobility devices will be directed to enter via a door adjacent to the screening equipment where alternative screening will occur. Patrons with children in strollers may enter through the screening equipment. Bag and Personal Belongings Policy Heinz Hall reserves the right to search any bags entering the facility. Oversized bags must fit comfortably under a seat to ensure the safety of patrons entering or exiting seats and aisles. Bags failing to meet these requirements must be checked at which time a search will be conducted by security or returned to your vehicle. You are encouraged to leave personal computers and iPads at home, as they are required to be turned off during performances. Costume Policy Heinz Hall does not permit masks of any kind or facsimiles of weapons that would make other guests feel uncomfortable or detract from the concert experience. Guests are welcome to attend certain programs (such as, The Music of Harry Potter or The Music of Star Wars ) in costume.
What exactly is the Heinz Hall “free-flow” screening system? In use at hundreds of sites worldwide including Lincoln Center, Oakland (CA) Airport and LL Bean, the Heinz Hall screening system uses “smart” technology to enhance visitor security and convenience. Heinz Hall selected a “free-flow” system which allows patrons to simply walk through unimpeded. There is no need to remove coats or bags; cell phones and keys can remain in your pockets. Patrons using wheelchairs and mobility devices will be directed to enter via a door adjacent to the screening equipment where alternative screening will occur. Patrons with children in strollers may enter through the screening equipment. Artists and promoters may require additional security procedures for their performances.
What if I don't want to go through the scanner? An alternative entry door will be available that will have wanding and bag check.
Is the scanner safe for medical devices and pregnant women? The system is safe to go through with medical devices and for pregnant women. However, on request, you may use the alternative entry door that will have wanding and bag check.
Is screening the the same at every concert or event? As is the case now, artists and promoters may require additional security procedures for their performances.
What makes the system "smart" and what will you do with the video images? The screening equipment uses technology to screen for threats. The images captured by the system for alarm purposes are only captured briefly; they are not retained by Heinz Hall.