Aaron Mossburg
Viola
Aaron Mossburg, violist, has been recognized for his “exceptionally warm sound,” Sarasota Herald-Tribune, and a “solo that was absolutely stunning,” Cleveland Classical .
Aaron holds a Bachelor of Music degree from the Oberlin Conservatory of Music, where he studied with Division of Strings Director, Peter Slowik, as well as a Master of Music degree from the Cleveland Institute of Music with Robert Vernon, Principal Emeritus of The Cleveland Orchestra. Aaron has studied and performed at music festivals across the world, including The Perlman Music Program (New York), Verbier Festival Orchestras (Switzerland), Pacific Music Festival (Japan), Kneisel Hall (Maine), and the Sarasota Music Festival (Florida).
In 2011, Aaron gave his solo Carnegie Hall debut in which he was invited and sponsored by the Netherlands American Community Trust. Shortly thereafter, he received top honors in the senior divisions of both the American String Teachers Association's (ASTA) National Solo Competition in New York City and the Ohio Viola Society Solo Competition.
Mr. Mossburg has had the opportunity to perform chamber music and orchestra concerts all around the globe in such places as the Kennedy Center in Washington D.C., Lincoln Center in New York City, Shanghai, Beijing, Singapore, and the Dominican Republic. He has performed chamber music with Itzhak Perlman, Donald Weilerstein, Roger Tapping, Sergei Babayan, Steven Doane, as well as with members of the Escher String Quartet, Zorá Quartet, and the Tokyo String Quartet.
As a teacher, Aaron was formerly an adjunct professor of viola at Cleveland State University and has been a guest teacher and lecturer at the Oberlin Conservatory of Music as well as at the Eastman School of Music.
Most recently, Mr. Mossburg was Principal Viola of the Rochester Philharmonic Orchestra for the past three seasons and was a section violist there starting in 2015. Over the years, Aaron has also performed frequently with the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra, Indianapolis Symphony Orchestra, Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra, and The Cleveland Orchestra.
Aaron performs on a viola crafted by Douglas Cox that was completed in 2019.