Download a PDF of this FAQ here.
Who is on the audition panel?
Christopher Hahn, General Director; Antony Walker, Music Director; Robert Boldin, Director of Artistic Operations; Mark Trawka, Director of Musical Studies; Matthew Hrdlicka, Artistic Coordinator.
Is there an age limit to participate in Pittsburgh Opera’s Resident Artist Program?
There is not an official age limit, but most of our Resident Artists are in their 20’s and early 30’s. Singers are more likely to be granted an audition if they are about to or have recently completed formal academic training, but this is not a requirement to be considered for the program.
Do I need to be a U.S. citizen to attend the program?
Pittsburgh Opera will not apply for a visa on your behalf. If you have a current visa that will allow you to work in the United States for the full two-year program, we encourage you to apply.
What do I need to record? Do you have any guidance on how to record my selections?
Applicants are required to submit two (2) video recordings of selections in contrasting styles and languages recording within the last six months. One must be an opera aria; one may be a performance recording, if desired. Recordings may be made with either live accompaniment or a pre-recorded track.
For Opera America's resources on Remote Auditions please visit: Recording Resources for Virtual Auditions
When will I find out if I have been selected for a live or virtual audition?
Notifications for both live and virtual auditions will be sent on Friday, October 17, 2025 .
If I’m granted a virtual audition, what do I need to record?
Applicants who are granted a virtual audition will be required to record and submit two selections in one continuous video recording (without stopping the camera). This video MUST be recorded on or after September 2, 2025.
Repertoire for video auditions will be selected by the singer. We strongly recommend submitting contrasting selections, and preferably ones that you did not submit with your original application. Guidelines for repertoire selection and video production will be provided.
The deadline for submitting a virtual audition video is November 14, 2025.
What if I need to change my live audition date/time?
First, you should try to find a colleague who is willing to switch with you. Once you have made the switch, e-mail Matthew Hrdlicka, Artistic Coordinator, to notify him of the change. If you cannot make the switch yourself, please contact Matthew Hrdlicka and best efforts will be made to accommodate your request.
If I need to cancel my live audition, can I submit virtual audition materials instead?
If you need to cancel your live audition but would like to be considered virtually, please contact Matthew Hrdlicka , Artistic Coordinator.
How many arias will I sing?
If you are selected for a live audition, you will sing one aria of your choice. If you are
selected for a callback audition, you will sing two additional arias – one of your choice, followed by one aria of the panel’s choice. If you are selected for a virtual audition, you will sing two arias of your choice.
What if I don’t know an aria in every language requested?
You should sing the arias you are most comfortable performing.
What if I want to change my audition repertoire?
If you are selected for a live audition, you may update your repertoire at any time via YAP Tracker or submit a new repertoire list at the time of your audition. Virtual applicants selected for the second round will be required to re-submit a repertoire list for consideration by the panel.
What materials do I need to bring for the audition panel?
Hard copies of repertoire lists and resumes are not required; the panel will have all
materials submitted with your application. If you have an updated repertoire list or resume, you may submit it to the monitor at the time of your audition.
Is there a place to warm-up before my audition?
Warm-up space is limited and not guaranteed depending on the location. Please come to the audition prepared to sing.
How do I find out about live callback auditions?
All applicants, whether or not they are invited for a callback audition, will receive notification via YAP Tracker after auditions conclude on their assigned date.
When are casting decisions made?
Decisions will be made following the New York callback auditions. Offers will be given by telephone sometime early in the new year.
Will I receive feedback from the audition panel?
We regret that panelists will not be able to offer feedback immediately following the auditions or at any time thereafter.