This season, in addition to his Pittsburgh Opera assignments, Logan will appear as J. Edgar Hoover/Eisenstein in the workshop premiere of Robenson with PEAK Performances. This summer, Logan debuted with Santa Fe Opera as a member of the prestigious Apprentice Program, where he covered Borsa in Rigoletto and was featured in the Apprentice Scenes Concert.
Other notable performances include Lysander in A Midsummer Night’s Dream at University of Cincinnati College-Conservatory of Music (CCM), Don José in Carmen with the City Choir of Washington, Brother in The Seven Deadly Sins in his debuts with New World Symphony and Hilton Head Symphony, Tenor Soloist in Handel's Messiah with Dayton Philharmonic, Beadle Bamford in Sweeney Todd with Dayton Opera, Monastatos in Die Zauberflote with Utah Festival Opera, and Marcellus/Gravedigger in Hamlet in his debut with Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra, in collaboration with Opéra-Comique. In summer 2024, Logan joined Wolf Trap Opera as a Studio Artist, where he performed Brother in The Seven Deadly Sins , Prune Man in La bohème , and covered the role of Kronprinz in Silent Night . He has also been an Apprentice Artist with Des Moines Metro Opera where he performed scenes from Die Zauberflote (Tamino), and Don Giovanni (Don Ottavio).
A committed advocate for new music, Logan originated roles in Bulrusher by Nathaniel Stookey and Robeson/Moscow by Scott Davenport Richards in workshop with Cincinnati Opera: Opera Fusion. In February of 2024, Logan performed the role of Clarence Elkins in Blind Injustice by Scott Davenport Richards and David Cote, which was conducted by Ted Sperling and streamed on PBS.
In 2025, Logan was a District Winner in the South Carolina Laffont Competition. He has placed in various competitions throughout the United States, including the Gigli International Voice Competition where he received an Encouragement Award. He was named Finalist in the MIOpera International Vocal Competition, Semi-Finalist in the Savell Vocal Competition, and Semi-Finalist in the Pasadena Vocal Competition where he received a Career Grant. He also won Third Place in the Orpheus Vocal Competition, was named Finalist in the Lotte Lenya Competition, Second Place in the Rochester Oratorio Society International Vocal Competition, and Grand Prize Corbett Award Winner at the Corbett Competition in spring 2024.
Logan completed his operatic studies at CCM, earning his Bachelor of Music in 2020 and Master of Music in 2023, and recently graduating from CCM’s competitive Artist Diploma program.
Mr. Wagner’s residency is generously sponsored by Abby L. Morrison in memory of Dr. Lesa B. Morrison, by Janice Talerico, and by John and Nancy Traina.