American Association of People with Disabilites (AAPD)
As a national disability-led and cross-disability rights organization, AAPD advocates for full civil rights for over 60 million Americans with disabilities. They promote equal opportunity, economic power, independent living, and political participation.
ADAPT-Advocacy
ADAPT’s vision of community is a place where all people can live, move, and participate in the ways that recognize and support their individual dignity and freedom. Their vision is integration into all aspects of society, where every member of the community experiences opportunities, not barriers.
Administration for Community Living
The Administration for Community Living was created around the fundamental principle that older adults and people of all ages with disabilities should be able to live where they choose, with the people they choose, and with the ability to participate fully in their communities.
Allegheny Family Network
Allegheny Family Network (AFN) supports and partners with families to improve their quality of life while raising children who have emotional and mental health needs.
Alliance for Infants & Toddlers
The Alliance for Infants and Toddlers, Inc. was established in 1988 by a Federal grant to assist families of low birth weight infants. In 1996, The Alliance was chosen by Allegheny County as the Early Intervention Service Coordination Agency for families of children, ages birth to three years, who have developmental concerns.
Allies for Health + Wellbeing
Their services are open to everyone, and they specialize in HIV, hepatitis C, and STI testing and care, gender-affirming care, and inclusive primary care concerns.
Autism Connection of PA
Autism Connection of PA is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit, serving thousands of people seeking help with autism related concerns. The organization understands, and provides text, email, and phone support plus weekly autism news and information. Autism Connection consults on arts, culture, school and justice issues and sponsors support groups across Pennsylvania.
Autism Urban Connections Inc.
Autism Urban Connections Inc. is the first and only African American, minority, family-focused Autism 501(c)(3) Nonprofit Organization in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Their mission is to provide education, support, advocacy, and empowerment, with an emphasis on self-care to families of those diagnosed with Autism. Their vision is for all families to receive individualized supports and education to access valuable resources and services that enhance quality of life, break down barriers, and address the disparities in the most marginalized communities.
Blind & Vision Rehabilitation Services of Pittsburgh
Blind and Vision Rehabilitation Services of Pittsburgh’s mission is to improve the lives of persons with vision loss and related disabilities by teaching independence and self-advocacy to people who are Blind, Deafblind, or Vision Impaired.
Caregiver Resource Center: Putting You First | Hope Grows
During their 11-year history as a non-profit, Hope Grows has been providing emotional/mental health services and counseling to family caregivers through on-site programming, phone, and in-person counseling or virtual services, support programming, Therapeutic Respite™ activities, and educational programming.  The delivery of Wellness Kits, Welcome and Bereavement Packets, and Quarterly Tuck In Phone Calls add to the support provided. In 2023, Hope Grows opened the Iris Respite House Bed & Breakfast which creates an opportunity for family caregivers to experience an overnight, stress-free, nurturing environment.
Center for Deaf & Hearing Services, Inc.
The Center for Deaf & Hearing Services provides a wide range of professional services for people who are Deaf, Deafblind, and Hard of Hearing. This includes ASL Interpretation services. The Center has an on-site, small store to browse, purchase, or order adaptive equipment.
Center for Assistive Technology-UPMC
Are you in need of assistive technology services or products to help with mobility, communication, or comfort in your day-to-day life? The Center for Assistive Technology (CAT) at UPMC Rehabilitation Institute is a leader and innovator in the assistive technology field. The CAT is an interdisciplinary center comprised of multiple outpatient clinics that offer a variety of assistive services.
Community Living and Support Services (CLASS)
CLASS offers a variety of individualized services ranging from independent living skills training in the classroom to community-based case management for social, recreational, and residential supports.
Community Options, Inc.
Community Options believes in the dignity of every person, and in the freedom of all people to experience the highest degree of self-determination. Embracing this philosophy, Community Options works with individuals with significant disabilities through residential services, day programs, social enterprises that employ individuals with disabilities, high school transition programs, and specialized programs for respite and medically fragile adults.
Department of Human Services
DHS’s mission is to assist Pennsylvanians in leading safe, healthy, and productive lives through equitable, trauma-informed, and outcome-focused services while being an accountable steward of Commonwealth resources.
Disability Advocacy and Research Network - DARN Disability
The Disability and Advocacy Research Network is for disabled people in psychology careers at any stage (including students) . DARN also welcomes allies and those who study, work with, and/or teach about disability. Following a social model perspective, anyone who identifies or is viewed by others as having a disability can be considered to have a disability. This includes but is not limited to physical, sensory, cognitive, invisible, chronic illness, and mental health conditions. DARN facilitates community building, mentoring, professional development, and resource sharing.
Disability Options Network
Disability Options Network is an advocacy organization that focuses on advocacy around disability rights issues, as well as skills training, peer support, transitioning, and information and referral services.
Disability Pride Pennsylvania
More than just a means of self advocacy and a push for acceptance, Disability Pride is above all a celebration of inclusion and disabled people who are proud to be themselves!
Disabilities Resources in the Community, UPMC
UPMC’s Disabilities Resource Center provides links to resources designed to help people with disabilities live independently and be active within the community.
Disability Information and Access Line (DIAL)
The Disability Information and Access Line (DIAL) helps people with disabilities get connected to information about local community resources that support independent living.
Down Syndrome Center at Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh
The Down Syndrome Center provides families with the tools they need to become educated and strong advocates for children and adolescents with Down syndrome.
Friendship Circle
Friendship Circle creates fun and innovative programs that enable youth and young adults of all abilities to be firmly connected in the community through friendships and relationships, access to wellness supports, and employment opportunities. In doing so, they develop active, empowered members and young leaders who strengthen both Friendship Circle and greater communities.
HealthBridges
Behavioral healthcare, social service, and advocacy information for people who are Deaf, Deafblind, and Hard of Hearing.
Highmark Caring Place-Grief Support
The larger mission of the Highmark Caring Place is to raise awareness in the community of the needs of grieving children and how to respond to them. Beyond peer support groups, the Caring Place provides referral services, adult telephone support and educational programs and resources for grieving children and families as well as consultation services, educational presentations and resources for schools and other professionals in the community who work with children.
National Association of the Deaf
The National Association of the Deaf (NAD) is the nation’s premier civil rights organization of, by and for Deaf and Hard of Hearing individuals in the US. Established in 1880, the NAD was shaped by Deaf leaders who believed in the rights of members of the American Deaf community to use sign language, to congregate on issues important to them, and to have their interests represented at the national level.
NAMI Keystone
Located in Pittsburgh, NAMI Keystone Pennsylvania is a 501(c)(3) grassroots, nonprofit organization dedicated to improving the lives of children, adolescents, adults, and families affected by mental illness through recovery-focused support, education, and advocacy.
Oakland For All
Advocating for a more accessibility-friendly business district, Oakland For All: Beyond Accessible is a collaborative program driven by Oakland stakeholders, nonprofit organizations, local and state government offices, as well as community advocates.
Office for the Deaf & Hard of Hearing (ODHH), PA Dept. of Labor
The Office for the Deaf & Hard of Hearing (ODHH) is an office within the Pennsylvania Department of Labor & Industry that serves all 67 counties. ODHH is your first stop on the path to learn about anything and everything related to hearing loss, such as services, technology, sign language interpreters, or laws that require equal access for people who are Deaf, Deafblind, or Hard of Hearing.
PAHrtners, Behavioral and Mental Health Services for the Deaf
PAHrtners provides community-based behavioral and mental health programs for individuals who utilize sign language as their primary mode of communication. Services include supportive living programs, outpatient therapy, psychiatric evaluations, medication management, case management, day programs and community participation support.
PA Developmental Disabilities Council
The Pennsylvania Developmental Disabilities Council is a group of people with disabilities, family members, advocates, and state department representatives who work to create favorable conditions for people with developmental disabilities and their families in the Commonwealth.
Pennsylvania Partnership for the DeafBlind
The PPDB is a family-led organization governed by a Board of Directors. Our members set the organization’s priorities with an agenda to serve the needs of the families connected to us, and educate public officials on issues involving DeafBlindness.  Most of our members are parents of children with DeafBlindness.
Parent to Parent of Pennsylvania
A resource matching peer parents of children with similar disabilities for support throughout PA.
PathWays of SWPA, Inc.
For over 50 years, PathWays has provided innovative, person-centered services to the community. Today, more than 1600 families in Southwestern Pennsylvania are on the path to lifelong fulfillment through PathWays, which serves individuals and families with Intellectual and/or Developmental Disabilities.
PA Tourette Syndrome Alliance
Individual and family support for those needing it regarding living with Tourette’s Syndrome.
The PEAL Center
Promotes inclusion and access in education and healthcare.
People With Disabilities Foundation
PDF provides education and advocacy for people with psychiatric and/or Developmental Disabilities, with or without physical disabilities, so that they can achieve equal opportunities in all aspects of life. Their goal is to provide total integration of people with mental disabilities into the whole of society.
Pittsburgh Center for Autistic Advocacy
The Pittsburgh Center for Autistic Advocacy seeks to advance the equity of autistic people in all realms of life. PCAA believes in inclusive education, policy, and community for autistic people and all people with disabilities. They work to make autistic voices heard in conversations about autism and empower autistic leaders in the community using principles of the disability rights movement and intersectional feminism.
Rep. Dan Miller-Disability and Mental Health Summit
The Disability and Mental Health Summit, held annually, is designed to bring disability resources and experts out of their offices and into an easy-to-access environment, where people can meet face-to-face to better solve problems.
Self-Advocacy Voices
The Self-Advocacy Voices mentorship incubator program empowers people with disabilities to give voice to their interests, passions, knowledge, and experiences through public speaking within a supportive environment of peers and mentors.
Pittsburgh Mercy Intellectual & Developmental Disabilities Services
UPMC’s services are designed to promote community inclusion and improve quality of life, whether it’s providing vocational training, preparing for employment or volunteer work, arranging housing and services that match the amount of supervision needed, or providing community opportunities and in-home support for those living with their families.
The Arc of PA
The Arc of Pennsylvania promotes the human rights of people with intellectual and Developmental Disabilities and actively supports their full inclusion and participation in the community throughout their lifetimes.