Violetta Valéry is hosting a lively party at her beautiful Paris apartment. Flora arrives late with a small group and everyone sits for dinner.
Gastone introduces Violetta to Alfredo Germont, an admirer who has long adored her from afar. Alfredo flirts with her in a rousing drinking song, the famous Brindisi “Libiamo ne’lieti calici”.
Alfredo confesses to Violetta that he has loved her for more than a year. Moved, Violetta attempts to warn him, saying that she “doesn’t know how to love” but he is undeterred. Later, Violetta seriously considers his proposal but then vows that she wants to remain "sempre libera" - always free.
Alfredo eventually wins Violetta over, and they move to a house in the country. Alfredo sings about how happy he has been ever since Violetta told him “I want to live, faithful to you alone.”
However, Alfredo’s father Giorgio Germont disapproves of Violetta’s relationship with Alfredo, which threatens his family’s reputation and his daughter’s engagement. He coerces Violetta into breaking up with Alfredo, then returns to console his son. But Alfredo discovers that Violetta has gone to Flora's masquerade and he returns to Paris to confront her there.
At the party, Violetta soon appears on the arm of the Baron, to whom she has returned in an effort to break permanently with Alfredo. After winning a great deal of money, Alfredo confronts Violetta. She lies and says that she no longer loves him, but loves the Baron instead. Enraged, Alfredo calls everyone to witness as he throws the money at Violetta. Germont chastises his son and the Baron challenges Alfredo to a duel.
Several months later, Violetta, now destitute and abandoned, is dying of tuberculosis. In a letter she learns that Germont has finally confessed his plot to Alfredo, who is returning to reconcile with her. Their joyful reunion is soon overshadowed by her illness. Violetta bids farewell “to happy dreams of by-gone days.” Alfredo's father also returns with the Doctor, but it is too late.