Even more than for its gorgeous opera house, sandy beaches, or colourful reefs, Australia has cemented its reputation as home to some of the world’s deadliest animals. Or, if you believe the rumours, maybe even all of the world’s deadliest animals.
The numbers tell a different story. It is estimated that Australia hosts 66 venomous species, ranking beneath countries such as Brazil (with 79 species) and Mexico (with 80). But if it’s the amount of venom in those creatures that counts—which is certainly the case if you find yourself bitten or stung by one—Australia’s most-deadly status starts to make more sense. Its inland taipan snakes, box jellyfish , Sydney funnel-web spiders, and stonefish all rank among the most venomous of their kind.
The best illustration of Australia’s deadly-animal problem may be the Elapidae snake family: a venomous group characterized by its short fangs and agile nature. Out of 300 elapid species, which include the taipan, coral snake , and mamba , 60 can be found across the land and waters of Australia. Some are small and shy around humans, while others are large and obtrusive. Striking with a downward stabbing motion, elapids kill by injecting a neurotoxic venom that causes immediate paralysis in prey. Once bitten, a prey animal—which for an elapid may include rodents, small birds, and even other snakes—is unable to escape being completely devoured. The venom released by one bite of a taipan is, if given the chance, enough to kill 250,000 mice.
The reason why almost all Australian snakes are venomous is that almost all of them are elapids. Researchers use the theory of continental drift , which posits that Earth’s continents once experienced a large-scale movement away from one another, to interpret the lineage of this dangerous population. When landmasses separated, it is likely that Australia’s snake population was entirely venomous. Although other continents retained populations of venomous and nonvenomous snakes after the continental drift, resulting in a diverse snake population today, Australia’s modern-day snakes share purely venomous ancestors—a heritage resulting in the most toxic group of snakes on the planet.
But while Australia is home to some of the deadliest creatures on the planet (we haven’t even gone into detail about the Sydney funnel-web spider, whose bite releases a neurotoxin that can kill a child in only 15 minutes), that doesn’t mean Australia is actually the deadliest continent. Contact with its venomous inhabitants is, in reality, incredibly rare. With the development of antivenins to combat different species’ toxins, deaths from such a bite or sting are even rarer. Of the 41,000 people hospitalized as a result of a venomous bite or sting from 2000 to 2013, only 64 victims lost their lives.
Of course, it’s not only venomous species that can be lethal. Sharks have no venom, nor do cassowaries , which are considered perhaps the most dangerous birds in the world, thanks to the daggerlike nails on two of their six toes. Though both animals are common in Australia or its surrounding waters and are considered threatening, aggression toward humans from either is still relatively rare. On average, shark attacks historically have claimed fewer than one victim per year, with nonfatal attacks ranging anywhere from 8 to 19 per year between 2011 and 2020. Though cassowaries are more likely to engage with humans, attacking more than 200 people per year, only one cassowary-related death has occurred since the 1920s.
Does Australia deserve its deadly reputation? Certainly. Especially when compared with the creatures of other continents, Australia’s animals possess an uncanny ability to kill. But will an encounter with an Australian animal kill you? Unless you hunt down an inland taipan in its remote desert home and provoke it, probably not. Though science has not yet revealed why the Sydney funnel-web spider needs to be so venomous, visitors to the continent can rest easy in the knowledge that an antivenin for its bite exists, so a hairy spider face won’t be the last thing they ever see.