Celebrations are what continue to keep the nostalgia of holiday magic alive. From Christmas parties to Hannukah gift-giving and New Year’s festivities, there’s always an occasion to mark the busy holiday season. One thing that unites all these celebrations is sharing a meal amongst loved ones.
The Frick Family celebrated Christmas, and the foods served during their holiday diners had varied inspirations all epitomizing the wealth of the Gilded Age. The Frick’s could afford expensive culinary delicacies like confectionary desserts, fresh seasonal produce, and delicately prepared meats. Such extravagance would undoubtedly be on display and served on a fine platter. Christmas dinner could feature a giant roasted turkey, certainly mouthwatering enough to satisfy everyone’s comfort-food cravings. Even the Frick’s version of a “kids” table would likely be adorned with holiday décor and fancy desserts such as pistachio ice cream and a Charlotte Russe cake, a decadent bread pudding served with sugared ladyfingers all around the side. The Frick’s were certainly fortunate to enjoy such lavish dinners and desserts for their Christmas dinners, but not everyone could afford the same extravagant foods. What remained the same for families holding a holiday feast, regardless of what was served, was more so about the act itself: “But in fact, meals along the entire spectrum of means in nineteenth-century America were linked by a common concern with ritual, formality, and schedule.” 1 Such words harken images of deep Christmas traditions that families like the Frick’s celebrated. If you’re looking to catch a glimpse into classic Gilded Age Christmas traditions, I won’t spoil the fun, and instead encourage you to tour Clayton house for its “ Home for the Holidays ” tour!
There are so many ways that holiday traditions in the Gilded Age have shaped our modern understanding of celebrations. One of the biggest influences was the large influx of immigrants who came to the United States between 1871 and 1901, totaling over 11 million people. These immigrants brought over traditional foods and recipes from their homelands to the United States, excited to celebrate the holiday season in their new homes. 2 Parties, family gatherings, and small gift-giving became more common during the late 19th century. 3 Immigration also brought on new traditions in holiday meals. Sometimes, this was done by adding their own twist to the original meals from their homelands, such as the feast of the seven fishes. 4 Originating in Southern Italy, this fish feast is popular amongst Italian Americans, of which there is a significant population in Pittsburgh. Enjoying the traditional foods of ancestral homes is a way to bring together family and celebrate your shared heritage.
There are countless regional differences in the food served over the holidays in the U.S. For those celebrating Hannukah, you can expect to see scrumptious fried potato cakes called latkes to mark the holiday. These savory fried potatoes are a favorite Hannukah dish that dates back centuries. 5 In the southern region of the U.S. near the Gulf Coast, you may come across a steaming hot pot of gumbo. The rich broth and spices depend on the region, but you can expect the aroma of bay leaves, filé, okra, and perhaps turkey and ham swapped for the crabs and shrimp. 6 Meanwhile, near the southwest corner of the country, tamales grace the dinner table and are typically served in a corn husk and filled with meats, cheeses, or veggies. 7
When thinking about all these different and delicious foods, it is important to remember those who are behind the preparation of holiday meals. Great effort is put into cooking large dinners, whether it’s the beloved patriarch or matriarch or families contributing and working together, the efforts and contributions that go into making and preparing food deserve its due appreciation. The Frick family employed a large staff, especially during the holidays. Workers like Mary Coyne, Bridgit Conroy, and Spencer Ford would probably have worked through Christmas and other holidays to ensure that the family and their guests’ dinner was prepared and served. Whether you’re having a family meal prepared by your grandmother or getting a meal catered, be sure to show gratitude for the work and care put into making your holiday meal. And whatever the holiday meal you choose to enjoy, remember that it is special because of your own unique traditions. So, grab a mug of mulled wine, a steaming hot cup of cocoa, or a classic eggnog and settle in for another year marking the festivities of the holiday you celebrate. Enjoy cooking your family’s beloved traditional holiday dish, or maybe try something new—just remember to savor every bite!
Lara Bromyard is finishing her Master's degree in Public History at Duquesne University, and worked as an intern in the Learning & Visitor Experience department at the Frick in the fall of 2024.
1 Susan Williams, Savory Suppers and Fashionable Feasts: Dining in Victorian America (Knoxville: The University of Tennessee Press, 1996). 2 Roger Daniels, “Immigration in the Gilded Age: Change or Continuity?,” OAH Magazine of History 13, no. 4 (1999): 21–25. 3 Penne Restad, “Christmas in 19th Century America,” History Today (blog), 1995, https://www.historytoday.com/archive/feature/christmas-19th-century-america. 4 Murray Schulman, “Italian Immigrants and the Feast of the Seven Fishes,” Italian American Herald, The Delaware Valley Italian American Herald (blog), 2021, https://italianamericanherald.com/italian-immigrants-and-the-feast-of-the-seven-fishes/. 5 Jane Tuszynski, “The Modern Potato Latke Was Not Inevitable,” Smithsonian Center for Folklife and Cultural Heritage, December 1, 2021, https://folklife.si.edu/magazine/foodways-holidays-hanukkah-latkes. 6 Stanley Dry, “A Short History of Gumbo,” Southern Foodways Alliance, Oral Histories (blog), 2011, https://www.southernfoodways.org/interview/a-short-history-of-gumbo/. 7 Jennifer Harbster, “Tamales and the Tamalada: A Christmas Tradition | Inside Adams,” webpage, The Library of Congress, December 23, 2022, https://blogs.loc.gov/inside_adams/2022/12/tamales-and-tamaladas.
Assistance from Bela Hanley in contributing archival documents.