The Persistent Pursuit of Excellence
Our 125-year legacy is only the beginning. With entrepreneurship and innovation in our DNA, we thrive on agility, seize pivotal moments, and embrace the future in our persistent pursuit of excellence .
We're ready for the challenges and opportunities that await us. Our priorities rest on a storied history and solid foundation, but we remain nimble and adaptable to our ever-changing world. This Strategic Planning Framework is a dynamic roadmap that will help us measure our achievements and uncover new opportunities.
Driven by our ambitious goals, a culture of excellence, and an eye on the future, CMU continues to advance our mission of having a transformative impact on society through continual innovation in education, research, creativity, and entrepreneurship.
Human-Centered Future of Education and Work
Empowering a Continent's Digital Leap
Leveraging AI and learning science, a perpetually endowed program in Africa drives digital transformation and provides career opportunities across the continent.
Expanding the Frontiers of Research and Creativity
Reaching for the Stars Through Collaborative Innovation
Demonstrating university-wide interdisciplinary collaboration to achieve ambitious goals in space exploration with the Iris lunar rover project .
Championing Holistic Well-being and Engagement
Creating a central hub that fosters a vibrant and supportive community, the Highmark Center for Health, Wellness and Athletics offers comprehensive health, wellness, and athletic resources for body, mind and spirit.
Fostering Dialogue and Meaningful Connections
Building an engaged and impactful community, initiatives like Deeper Conversations and the President’s Lecture Series promote civil discourse and explore relevant societal issues for students, faculty, and staff.
Cultivating Local Partnerships for Experiential Growth
Benefiting the Pittsburgh community, the Pittsburgh Summer Internship Program (PSIP) connects Carnegie Mellon students with local organizations for invaluable hands-on experience and fosters a strong sense of belonging and service.
Institutional Agility and Resilience
Opening Doors Through Transformative Access
Prioritizing responsible stewardship, the CMU Pathway Program , beginning in the 2025-2026 academic year, ensures deserving students can afford and attend CMU regardless of their socioeconomic background.
Cultivating the STEM Leaders of Tomorrow
Fostering long-term institutional resilience by investing in graduate education, the Rales Fellows Program is dedicated to cultivating the next generation of STEM innovators by increasing access to a life-changing graduate education.
Ensuring a Foundation for Enduring Impact
Demonstrating responsible stewardship of university resources, Carnegie Mellon University's endowment stood at $3.2 billion as of June 30, 2024, supporting long-term institutional resilience.