SLR Areas of Impact
Each recipient of this recognition has created a unique imprint on the culture and life of CMU through their contributions to student leadership, community engagement, the arts, athletics, academics, and research. Consider the following when identifying a recipient:
Academics & Research
Students display unparalleled leadership by demonstrating superior aptitude in their academic field of study while advancing research and making unique contributions to the intellectual life of the campus community. Through their work, research, and initiatives, they drive progress and solutions to problems. These students may engage in focused, individualized work on a sustained independent project; enhance the community’s commitment to academic excellence; utilize creative and novel methods for leading and supporting their fellow students in their academic pursuits; or demonstrate superior initiative in applying knowledge in the community.
Arts
Students display unparalleled leadership by utilizing their artistic talents and inquiry as a means of self-exploration or as a community catalyst. The contributions of the student have served to enhance opportunities for artistic development and appreciation within the Carnegie Mellon community. Students may also utilize their artistic talents to promote community development, reflect diversity towards encouraging inclusion, and facilitate conversations surrounding societal issues.
Athletics
Students display unparalleled leadership by playing a significant role in athletic life through participation on campus athletic teams, sustained involvement in intramural activities or club sports, or commitment to advancing appreciation for the Carnegie Mellon athletic community. They embrace the role of being a scholar athlete and exhibit leadership, teamwork and sportsmanship both on and off the field through understanding of self and consistent demonstration of their values. These students actively seek opportunities to help teammates learn, grow and develop as individuals.
Community Engagement
Students display unparalleled leadership as they leverage their individual skills through volunteer and/or philanthropic initiatives to positively impact the CMU, Pittsburgh, and/or global community. These outstanding students exemplify a commitment to the sustainability of their efforts and an understanding of the needs of the community.
Community Development
Students display unparalleled leadership via active engagement in campus organizations and broad-based campus improvement initiatives. These students contribute to the metacurricular experience at Carnegie Mellon through sustained community-oriented activity in clubs and student organizations, residential house communities, fraternities and sororities, advisory councils, student government, or other student leadership roles. These students devote a substantial amount of effort in support of others, actively seeking opportunities to help others learn, grow and develop as individuals in areas related to wellness, diversity, spirituality and social responsibility. Students may also utilize their individual leadership skills to foster a more diverse and inclusive community at Carnegie Mellon.