How much does an Opus Pass cost?
The Pittsburgh Opera Opus Pass costs $20 a month.
Subscribers can add an Opus Pass Subscription Add On to their traditional seated subscription package for an extra $5 a month. For more information about the Opus Pass Subscription Add On, please see the 'FAQs - Opus Pass Subscription Add On' section below.
How do I buy an Opus Pass?
You can buy a Pittsburgh Opera Opus Pass by calling 412-281-0912 ext. 3, or you can order online .
How long does my Opus Pass last?
Pittsburgh Opera Opus Passes are valid for one year from its date of issue. Your Opus Pass will automatically renew unless you take action to make changes or cancel.
When does my Opus Pass 'start'?
Your pass will be active right away and you will be able to book seats as soon as one week prior to the opening of the next production.
What if I buy an Opus Pass after the season is already underway?
Since your Pittsburgh Opera Opus Passes is valid for one year from its date of issue, you will be able to use your Pass for any Pittsburgh Opera performances in the following season that fall within one year of purchase.
For example, if you purchase a Pass in December, you will be able to use it for all our remaining Season performances, as well as our October and November in the upcoming season's performances, even though they are part of our following season.
How do you bill me?
Your credit card will be charged once each calendar month.
Patrons who buy an Opus Pass will be charged monthly from date of purchase.
Can I pay for the whole year upfront?
Yes. If you choose our one-time payment option, you will save $20, i.e. you will get one month free.
My credit card's expiration date is before my Opus Pass expires. What should I do?
Please call us at 412-281-0912 ext. 3 with your updated credit card information prior to your card expiring.
Is it possible to cancel my Opus Pass before it expires?
If you need to cancel your Opus Pass before it expires, you can choose to receive a refund for the difference in value between what you've paid so far for your Pass and the normal single ticket face value price of any tickets you redeemed.
For example, if you had been a Passholder for six months and paid $120 for your Pass so far, and you'd redeemed your Pass for one ticket which had a regular price of $110, you would be eligible for a $10 refund.
If you have redeemed your Pass for tickets whose normal face values totals more than you've paid so far for your Pass, then Pittsburgh Opera reserves the right to charge you for the difference. For example, if you buy a Pass, immediately redeem it for a ticket, and then after the performance you cancel your Pass, we will charge you the difference between the regular ticket price and the $20 you paid for your Pass. The Opus Pass is a great value, we just want to make sure folks don't try to game the system - not that you would ever do that of course!
All future ticket reservations will be forfeited upon cancellation of membership. There are no refunds retroactively after your Pass expires.