Get to know the Woman at Her Toilette
Like much of 19th-century France, the art world was a man's world. But as new styles emerged, women such as Berthe Morisot stepped into the scene.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Transcript
Like much of 19th-century France, the art world was a man’s world. But as new styles emerged, women like Berthe Morisot stepped into the scene. Woman at Her Toilette offers a bold example of these now more visible  female perspectives.Morisot was born into a wealthy artistic family in 1841. From early on, Morisot was determined to be an artist.She trained at Paris’s École des Beaux-Arts from 1856 to ’59. Morisot also studied under the landscape and portrait painter Camille Corot until she met Édouard Manet in 1868. The two would forge a lifelong professional friendship. Manet painted Morisot on a number of occasions. Morisot married Manet’s brother Eugène in 1874. Starting in 1864, Morisot’s paintings were regularly exhibited at the prestigious Paris Salon. But 10 years later she vowed to never again show her work at the traditional galleries, to demonstrate her commitment to the Impressionist movement. Her painting The Cradle was shown at the Impressionists’ first exhibition in 1874.She is one of only two female artists consistently included in discussions about the Impressionists, along with Mary Cassatt. Morisot’s most famous work, Woman at Her Toilette, is a masterclass in the style.The painting shows a woman taking down her hair. It is an intimate moment. But the sense of eroticism a man might give this scene is absent. Morisot does not even show the woman’s reflection in the mirror. This obstruction makes the viewer a confidant, not a voyeur.The scene and subject matter are very ordinary, which was the Impressionists’ bread and butter. But Morisot’s use of light and color adds an ethereal nature to the painting. The woman almost seems to melt into the background in a wash of creams, lavenders, pinks, and greens. The occasional darker tones, such as her choker, anchor the painting.Morisot was much admired by her fellow Impressionists. But her insistence on design aligns her work closer to Manet’s, who rooted his paintings in traditional techniques and themes. Here, her feathery brushstrokes are relatively subdued. They delicately carve out the woman’s shoulder and the curve of her cheek.Morisot’s work often focused on women and children in private moments. Though highly acclaimed during her lifetime, she was not commercially successful. However, she outsold Claude Monet, Pierre-Auguste Renoir, and Alfred Sisley.