Marie Curie: World War I
During World War I Marie Curie developed a fleet of mobile radiological labs to bring X-ray equipment to doctors treating wounded soldiers at the front.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Transcript
Britannica explores these untold stories of women who changed the world from the homefront to the battlefront of the first world war. When war broke out in 1914, Marie Curie had just established the Radium Institute in Paris. With German armies encroaching on  the French capital, Curie  gathered her entire supply of radium, stashed  it in  a remote bank vault , and set off to put her science skills to a daring new test. Curie was a Nobel-winning scientist, not a soldier, but she knew there was one way her work could make a difference to the war effort. Early  x-ray machines were enormous  and found only in the most advanced hospitals of the day—not exactly convenient to the front lines. So Curie  designed a portable one; a device which would forever revolutionize medicine on and off the battlefield. Curie’s  first mobile radiology lab must have seemed like something hatched by a mad scientist.  Combining an X-ray machine, a darkroom for developing images, and a dynamo [explain]  to power the process. For the first time, military doctors  could detect the most minute pieces bullets and shrapnel lodged in wounds, without having to transport casualties. Soldiers at the front dubbed the portable X-ray labs “petites Curies” (“little Curies”), and Curie  enlisted her teenage daughter, Irène, as her assistant . Curie not only taught herself basic automotive maintenance, but also how to drive.  She soon had a fleet of 20 petites Curies servicing  the front lines. As the cars were useless without trained technicians, Curie personally trained at least 150 women in the fundamentals of radiology, anatomy, car repair, and photo processing. After the Western Front stabilized, Curie established some 200 radiological labs in battlefield hospitals. Thanks to her determination, an estimated one million Allied soldiers would receive X-rays during the war, saving untold lives in the process. In the years after the war, the portable X-ray unit underwent significant advances, and it remains a fixture of battlefield hospitals to this day