What made Sammy Davis, Jr., the world's greatest entertainer?
Davis recorded more than 50 albums and starred in three Broadway shows.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Transcript
Sammy Davis, Jr., is often called the greatest entertainer of all time. His act showcased dancing, comedy, music, and vocals. His talent and perseverance brought him fame, even as he contended with being a Black performer… during the era of segregation, dealing with racism, violence, and substance abuse issues. Sammy Davis, Jr., was born in Harlem, New York, in 1925… to a Puerto Rican mother who was a tap dancer and a Black father who was a vaudeville actor. Sammy Davis, Sr., took his son on tour with him. By the time he was four, Davis was part of the act, now a trio. Davis toured with the company until he was drafted in 1942. He later wrote that the racism he encountered in the army surprised him, because his father had shielded him from it so well during childhood. Davis was repeatedly assaulted and harassed by fellow soldiers. He focused on honing his entertaining craft during this time, performing for camps as part of the Special Services unit. He rejoined the Will Mastin Trio after the army, and he began recording songs. The trio performed at popular nightclubs in New York, which is where Davis befriended Frank Sinatra. Davis made his Broadway debut a year later. Several television appearances followed. In 1960 he accepted Sinatra’s invitation to join him—along with Dean Martin, Joey Bishop, and Peter Lawford—in Vegas. By day they filmed Ocean’s Eleven, and by night they played shows. They were a smash success, with 35,000 requests for rooms at the casino in the first month. The press dubbed them the Rat Pack. Lawford’s connections to the Kennedy family meant that John F. Kennedy began attending their shows. The Rat Pack ardently campaigned for JFK’s presidency… but Davis’s interracial marriage to Swedish actress May Britt—then still illegal in 31 states—caused JFK to rescind Davis’s invitation to perform at an inaugural gala. This rejection led Davis to embrace Richard Nixon… —literally, he hugged him onstage and received criticism for it— and he also marched with Martin Luther King, Jr., and championed civil rights. A wave of uprisings swept the country after King's assassination in 1968. Demonstrations in nearly 200 cities turned to riots with varying levels of violence that saw 43 killed and more than 3,500 injured. Davis condemned the response. And I don't see sad faces mourning the tragic loss of this great American. I see people laughing and giggling. I somehow want to disown those people. I don't want to call those people who are laughing—less than 48 hours after our leader died—and stealing… those are not really brothers. Those cannot be the people who are striving for the dignity that we should have at this point. Before Davis became a star, he wasn’t allowed to stay in the hotels he performed at. After his fame skyrocketed, however, he could afford to turn down gigs that treated him poorly because of his race… and in doing so he helped spur the integration of Miami nightclubs and Las Vegas casinos. By the time of his death in 1990, Davis had recorded more than 50 albums and starred in three Broadway shows. He was posthumously awarded a Lifetime Achievement Grammy.