How a Foley artist creates sound effects for screen
Hiss. Pop. Slurp. Hear that? That's Foley.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Transcript
Katie Waters: I’m Katie Waters and I’m a Foley artist. Foley is performing sound effects live to picture. Say, for example, someone’s walking in sneakers on concrete, and they will put on the sneakers and walk on the concrete as they’re watching the picture, and performing the sound effects and follow the actor on the screen walking exactly how they are, and fit in with what that world is, and making it sound as real as possible. Bryen Hensley: I just want to hear some where the balloons are just hitting each other not squeaking or rubbing. Katie Waters: That might’ve done it. Katie Waters: Foley is a very team-oriented process. There’s the Foley artist, myself. There’s the Foley mixer, which is the person that’s responsible for recording the sound effects. If you go onto a Foley stage you see them sitting at the computer. They’re paying close attention to the levels of the sound, and the quality and the perspective, how it matches in relation to the visual. And of course, the director. At the end of the day, we’re delivering sounds for a director’s vision. We’re hoping that the Foley is the seamless glue that fits all the pieces of the soundtrack together. If they don’t notice it we’ve really done our job. Our Foley stage is a lot of different props from the people that work here, including myself. I’ve gone to antique stores just to look for squeaks. You know, just tinkering with everything. Or I’ll go and ask the person at the counter like ‘Hey, do you have anything that squeaks?’ and they’re like ‘Um… what?’ There are so many, so many amazing sounding props. I have a wooden, creaky chair that I use for a lot of wood creaks, I have a jar of slime, I have an old coffee grinder, there’s a leather shammy as a go-to that you just get wet. It’s great sounding and I love it. Foley is not a sound effect library, Foley is performance. There’s a human element to it. The human element brings emotion to every sound that comes to the microphone. That’s the difference to me that I want to try to educate people on.