David Attenborough: An explorer's life
Sir David Attenborough might have the most-recognizable voice in the world.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Transcript
British naturalist, biologist, and historian Sir David Attenborough might have the most-recognizable voice in the world, after narrating 60 years of nature documentaries over the course of his career. A renowned traveler and explorer and an elegant and eloquent advocate for conservation, Attenborough filmed environmental specials from 83 different countries. His shows featured all sorts of animals and places, from river turtles in the Amazon to mountain gorillas in Rwanda and 600,000 inquisitive king penguins in South Georgia.Attenborough’s enthusiasm for and careful observations of the natural world and the people, animals, and plants in it made him a perennial favorite media personality both in the days of black-and-white film and the Netflix era.One of Attenborough’s most recent documentary series, Wild Isles, brought him back to his U.K. homeland in 2023. David Frederick Attenborough was born in London, England, in 1926. He became interested in natural history at an early age, collecting fossils and stones as a child.After receiving a master’s degree in natural sciences in 1947, he found work in publishing. Soon after, he joined the BBC as a television producer, where he created the popular show Zoo Quest in 1954, alongside reptile curator Jack Lester.Over the next decade, Attenborough worked on various programming for the BBC, helping to expand their educational offerings and overseeing the first color TV broadcasts in Europe. He later resigned as director of television programming to write and develop his own shows. Some of his most popular series include Life on Earth in 1979 and The Blue Planet in 2001.He also narrated Blue Planet II in 2017, which earned him an Emmy.Many of Attenborough’s 21st-century series (and his Instagram posts) share his concerns about climate change and global warming threatening the wonderful natural world that he devoted his life to exploring.Attenborough was knighted twice for his contributions to broadcasting and conservation—first in 1985, and then he was awarded an even more prestigious title in 2022. In 2015 a living species of plant was named after him. Attenborough's hawkweed, a relative of the daisy, found in Wales, is a new species that was discovered in 2004.Attenborough was married to Jane Elizabeth Ebsworth Oriel until her death in 1997. The couple had two children.Attenborough is also the author of several books, including popular autobiographies about his life and travels.