Prospective students and their families are welcome to visit the Department of Biomedical Engineering. We make every effort to accommodate all requests for department visits year-round. To arrange a meeting, please contact the department in advance of your visit: Kristin Kropf .
The ChemE department offers Undergraduate Information Sessions for prospective students and their families, held both virtually and in person throughout the year. During the school year, prospective students may also sit in on our Introduction to Chemical Engineering course taught by Professor Joanne Beckwith Maddock . Please use this form to register.
We also offer student-led tours, which last approximately one hour and provide an insider’s perspective on campus life, as well as a look at ChemE facilities and lab spaces. To schedule a tour, please view our calendar . For questions, contact Sam Pulver .
Prospective students and their families are welcome to visit year-round. Use this link to schedule a visit, or reach out to Andrea Francioni Rooney , Director of Undergraduate Programs, if no meeting times are available.
ECE offers a student tour guide program for prospective students. During this 45–60 minute walking tour, visitors will get an insider’s perspective on student life while exploring new labs and learning about the department. For more information and to schedule a tour, visit our website . Note: Tours are offered only in fall and spring; none in summer.
Prospective students and their families are welcome to schedule a visit. Please contact the department at least two weeks in advance by emailing Gabi Rogers .
Prospective students and their families are welcome to visit the Engineering and Public Policy office year-round to discuss the Engineering and Public Policy or Science, Technology and Public Policy double majors. To schedule an appointment prior to your visit, please visit the Engineering and Public Policy website . For drop-in visits, please contact Deborah Kuntz , EPP Program Coordinator at 412-268-3303.
Prospective students and their families are encouraged to visit the Materials Science and Engineering Department. We make every effort to accommodate all requests for department visits year-round. To request a visit, please complete this form . If you have additional questions, please reach out to Paige Houser , Undergraduate Academic Advisor.
Prospective students and their families are encouraged to visit the Mechanical Engineering Department. To schedule an appointment, please fill out the Department Tour Request form . If you have any questions about visiting the department, please email cmumechetours@andrew.cmu.edu .