According to the 2020 U.S. Census, approximately how many people live in the City of Pittsburgh?
After crossing the Monongahela, which Washington County borough does the route enter?
After entering Pennsylvania, through which Fayette County township does the route first pass?
After World War II, what was the name of the civic revitalization project that Pittsburgh began?
Are gift memberships at Carnegie Museums transferable? Answer yes or no.
At what age did the director of August Wilson's Cycle pass?
Before Mike Tomlin, who was the head coach of football at UPitt?
By 1850, what was another nicknmame for Pittsburgh?
Carnegie is buried only a few yards away from who?
CMU’s West Coast campus is located inside which NASA facility?
Did Carnegie oppose the annexation of the Hawaiian islands?
From which university will a new program bring med students to the University of Pittsburgh?
How many Super Bowl titles have the Pittsburgh Steelers won?
How many visitors does Station Square attract?
In 1883, Carnegie bought which rival of his own company?
In 1946, who was hired by Carnegie Institute of Technology to restart the school's economics department?
In 2001, Heinz Field and PNC Park replaced what stadium?
In 2023, the PIttsburgh City Council approved an increase to the police budget by what dollar amount?
In 2024, how many Carnegie Mellon graduate programs ranked in the top 10 nationwide?
In chemistry, what are charged species formed by losing or gaining electrons called?
In what division does Pitt-Greensburg compete in athletically?
In what Middle Eastern country is CMU’s branch campus at Education City?
In what year did Carnegie Science Center enter the Carnegie Museums?
In what year did CMU open its branch campus in Education City?
In what year did Pittsburgh host the G20 summit?
In what year did Pittsburgh's Nickelodeon introduce the moving picture theater?
In what year did the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra make its debut at Carnegie Music Hall in Oakland?
In what year did Virginia and Pennsylvania come to an agreement on their mutual borders?
In what year was The Management Game first introduced by CMU?
In which hall is the College's Office of the Dean housed in?
In which Silicon Valley city is CMU’s West Coast campus located?
In which township is the Redstone mainline toll gantry located?
In which West Virginia county is Cheat Lake located at the southern terminus toward Pittsburgh?
Kamin Science Center attracts nearly how many visitors each year?
Night of the Living Dead, produced in 1968, was made by who?
Pittsburgh was transformed into a liberal stronghold of what group?
Raj Reddy holds what chair at the School of Computer Science at CMU?
Scott made it possible for Carnegie to invest what dollar amount into Adams Express Company?
Squirrel Hill is home to approximately how many synagogues?
The Gene Kelly Awards honors students in what study / major?
The Pittsburgh Triangles played tennis where?
The Steelers have been owned by which family since the team's founding in 1933?
What annual Pittsburgh event celebrates Irish heritage?
What are the Sunday hours of the Pittsburgh Symphony?
What CMU alum voiced the character Sid in the Ice Age movies?
What CMU robotics lab is famous for developing self-driving car technology that won the 2007 DARPA Urban Challenge?
What date does the RV Fall Show start in 2025?
What day will Ben Folds return to pittsburgh to play with the Pittsburgh Symphony?
What does the tradition of sliding or stepping on the former home plate of Forbes Field signify?
What famed museum on the North Shore houses the world’s largest collection of Warhol art and archives?
What famous inventor of the polio vaccine worked at the University of Pittsburgh?
What famous machine learning venue had its first conference in Pittsburgh in 1980?
What history museum in the Strip District is Pennsylvania’s largest and an affiliate of the Smithsonian Institution?
What iconic Pittsburgh sandwich is topped with French fries and coleslaw?
What indoor arena is the home venue of the Pittsburgh Penguins?
What is CMU’s official mascot?
What is Pittsburgh most similar to in terms of annual percent average possible sunshine received?
What is the area at the center of campus in Carnegie Mellon known as? This place is also home to The Fence at CMU.
What is the Carnegie Mellon football fraternity called?
What is the Carnegie Mellon Tartans original fight song titled?
What is the championship game of the National Football League pursued by Pittsburgh’s NFL team?
What is the largest non-government employer in Allegnheny County?
What is the main stage acts on Cedarville exclusively?
What is the motto of Carnegie Mellon University?
What is the name of CMU’s computer science complex along Forbes Avenue?
What is the name of CMU’s student newspaper?
What is the name of Pittsburgh’s international airport?
What is the name of the glasshouse and gardens in Oakland near CMU?
What is the name of the iconic CMU building whose rotunda is topped by a green dome and serves as a symbol of the university?
What is the name of the large urban park that borders CMU’s campus and contains Phipps Conservatory?
What is the name of the mainline toll plaza encountered near Fairchance?
What is the name of the Pittsburgh NBA G League team?
What is the name of the Pittsburgh NHL hockey team?
What is the official home ballpark of the Pittsburgh Pirates?
What is the region's largest heritage festival?
What is the street address of that arena?
What is the street address of that ballpark?
What is the tallest building in Pittsburgh?
What is the three-digit telephone area code most associated with Pittsburgh?
What is the title of the famous CMU “Last Lecture” by Randy Pausch?
What kind of method did Carnegie encourage in terms of investigation of the various causes of war?
What major park borders the CMU campus?
What National Historic Landmark park sits at the tip of Pittsburgh’s “Golden Triangle”?
What number can I call for Carnegie Museum / Carnegie Museum of Art Theater? Format your answer as one number.
What percentage of steel was produced in Pittsburgh by war's end?
What Pittsburgh bridge is painted bright yellow and named after a famous baseball player?
What Pittsburgh neighborhood is home to the Cathedral of Learning?
What research center at CMU focuses on cybersecurity?
What riverside trail system offers about 33 miles of urban paths through Pittsburgh and Allegheny County?
What student-run musical theater organization is famous at CMU?
What time is The Steel City Spooky Market happening?
What two rivers meet to form the Ohio River?
What unified number identifies the cross-state corridor serving the Pittsburgh region?
What was the first building constructed on CMU’s campus?
What was the name of the general that took command in 1777 of Fort Pitt?
What year did the Mellon Institute merge into CMU?
What year was the Carnegie Mellon School of Computer Science established?
What year was the Software Engineering Institute established at CMU?
What year was the University of Pittsburgh founded?
When did construction to complete the Mon–Fayette Expressway toward Duquesne begin?
When is homecoming weekend for CMU125?
When is the upcoming ABBA concert?
When was "Examining the American Peace Movement Prior to World War I" written?
Where is the Telegraph Road exit situated along the approach toward Pittsburgh?
Where is the Untitled (Art Party) hosted?
Where was Mark Cuban born?
Which agency maintains most of the tollway segments serving the Pittsburgh area?
Which batman movie was filmed at Carnegie mellon?
Which classic experiment illustrating wave–particle duality is referenced in the file?
Which CMU college is abbreviated “CIT” (also referred to as the College of Engineering)?
Which CMU college is abbreviated “DC” (Dietrich College of Humanities & Social Sciences)?
Which CMU college is named for H. John Heinz III?
Which corridor from Pittsburgh to Uniontown is the project intended to relieve?
Which early pro football player signed a $500 contract to face a Pittsburgh club?
Which famous zombie filmmaker studied in Pittsburgh?
Which interchange on the Uniontown bypass provides access to PA 21?
Which interstate numbers (three of them) roughly form a triangular-shaped beltway with Interstate 68 and 80? Write your answer as comma separated values in increasing order.
Which interstate to the west does the corridor aim to provide an alternative to for regional travel?
Which Ivy League AAU founding member in Pennsylvania is mentioned (regional context to CMU)?
Which local road interchange provides connections to US 40 and PA 51 along the way?
Which Pittsburgh company is famous for ketchup?
Which Pittsburgh film festival celebrates independent cinema?
Which Pittsburgh landmark is known as “The Point”?
Which Pittsburgh landmark is lit up with neon red sign that says “PITTSBURGH”?
Which Pittsburgh medical center is one of the largest hospital systems in the U.S.?
Which Pittsburgh neighborhood is home to CMU and Pitt?
Which Pittsburgh neighborhood is home to the historic Frick Park, the city’s largest regional park?
Which Pittsburgh television station is identified as the Fox affiliate?
Which Pittsburgh university was founded by Andrew Carnegie?
Which Pittsburgh-born composer wrote the music for “Mister Rogers’ Neighborhood”?
Which Pittsburgh-born playwright wrote “Fences”?
Which principle in quantum mechanics limits simultaneous precision of position and momentum?
Which river does the Expressway Bridge cross on the approach to Pittsburgh?
Which school at CMU is known for drama and the arts?
Which side of Pittsburgh is the planned high-speed link designed to serve?
Which state agency maintains the short segment of the corridor in West Virginia?
Which state route briefly runs concurrent with the corridor near US 40 before splitting at a cloverleaf?
Which three universities in Pittsburgh are listed together in the text?
Which town is bypassed to the west as the tollway continues north through woodland?
Which two Carnegie Museums share the historic building on Forbes Avenue in Oakland?
Which two interstates form the southern and planned northern connections related to Pittsburgh?
Which U.S. president visited Carnegie Mellon in 2008 to give a speech?
Which U.S. route joins the bypass west of Uniontown before later splitting northwest?
Which university’s basketball team is called the Panthers?
Who invented the first micro electro mechanical system?
Who is the top employer in Pittsburgh?
Who is UPitt's 18th chancellor?
Who told the Madwoman to be on her way?
Who was the chancellor of University of Pittsburgh from 1995 to 2014?
Who was the first rector of Trinity Episcopal Church of Pittsburgh?
