The American Bridge Company is a heavy/civil construction firm that specializes in building and renovating bridges and other large, complex structures. Founded in 1900, the company is headquartered in Coraopolis, Pennsylvania, a suburb of Pittsburgh. The firm has built many bridges in the U.S. and elsewhere; the Historic American Engineering Record notes at least 81.[1] American Bridge has also built or helped build the Willis Tower,[2] the Empire State Building,[3] the Chrysler Building,[4] launch pads, resorts, and more. During World War II, it produced tank landing ships (LSTs) for the United States Navy. In 2020, American Bridge Company was acquired by Southland Holdings LLC.

American Bridge Company was founded in April 1900, when J.P. Morgan & Co. led a consolidation of 28 of the largest U.S. steel fabricators and constructors.[5] The company's roots extend to the late 1860s, when one of the consolidated firms, Keystone Bridge Company, built the Eads Bridge at St. Louis, the first steel bridge over the Mississippi River and still in use. In 1902, the company became a subsidiary of United States Steel as part of the Steel Trust consolidation.

The company pioneered the use of steel as a construction material; developing the means and methods for fabrication and construction that allowed it to be widely used in buildings, bridges, vessels, and other plate applications.[citation needed] It went on to do work across the nation and around the world.

During World War II, the company built warships for the U.S. Navy. In 1944, American painter Thomas Hart Benton recorded the construction and launch of LST 768, producing numerous drawings and a painting, Cut the Line.[6]

The company went private in 1987 and was sold to Continental Engineering Corporation in 1988.[7]

The town of Ambridge, Pennsylvania, was an American Bridge company town (thus the name "Ambridge"), and is near their current headquarters of Coraopolis, Pennsylvania. Both municipalities are on the Ohio River near Pittsburgh, with access to many steel suppliers, as well as to waterborne and rail transport, to allow shipment of components and subassemblies.

In October 2020, American Bridge Company was acquired by Southland Holdings LLC, a Grapevine, Texas-based infrastructure company, for an undisclosed amount. At the time of the purchase, Southland stated that the company would keep its name and local staff.[8]

 This is a representative list, not an exhaustive one.

Built the longest concrete segmental cable stay bridge in the United States:

Built the longest suspension bridge in South America, and one of the longest in Europe:

Built the world's longest arch bridge on three occasions:

Built the world's longest self-supporting continuous truss bridge:

Renovations of existing bridges:

Built the world's tallest building on numerous occasions.

Built many other well-known buildings.

Built the world's largest building by volume twice.

Built two large domed stadium structures.
