The Great Allegheny Passage (GAP) is a 150-mile (240 km) rail trail between Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania and Cumberland, Maryland. Together with the C&O Canal towpath, the GAP is part of a 335 mi (539 km) route between Pittsburgh and Washington, D.C., that is popular with through hikers and cyclists.

The GAP follows former right-of-way of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, Pittsburgh and Lake Erie Railroad, Union Railroad, and Western Maryland Railway.

The first section of the GAP—9 mi (14 km) near Ohiopyle—opened in 1986.[3] The 9-mile (14 km) section between Woodcock Hollow and Cumberland opened on December 13, 2006.[4] The GAP was completed in 2013 when the section between West Homestead and Point State Park in Pittsburgh opened.[5] The completion project was named The Point Made, reflecting the fact that it was now possible to reach Point State Park from Washington, D.C. Celebrations took place on June 15, 2013. With its opening, Pennsylvania became the state with the most rail trails—900 mi (1,400 km), with 1,100 mi (1,800 km) more under development.[6]

The overall construction cost for the GAP was $80 million.[7]

The Allegheny Trail Alliance (ATA) was founded in 1995 as an umbrella organization for the GAP's seven trail organizations, which include Friends of the Riverfront, Steel Valley Trail, Regional Trail Corporation, Ohiopyle State Park, and Mountain Maryland Trails. Each organization maintains a particular section of the GAP. The ATA was later renamed The Great Allegheny Passage Conservancy.

The original name for the GAP was Cumberland and Pittsburgh Trail. Great Allegheny Passage was selected in 2001 by the ATA after six years and more than 100 proposals as a name evocative of the geography and historical heritage of the trail. It was suggested by Bill Metzger, editor of the ATA newsletter. The runner-up was Allegheny Frontier Trail.[6]

The GAP's route is composed of several shorter trails including the Allegheny Highlands Trail of Maryland, Allegheny Highlands Trail of Pennsylvania, Youghiogheny River Trail, Steel Valley Trail, and Three Rivers Heritage Trail. The GAP also includes the Mountour Trail, a 52-mile (84 km) branch that serves Pittsburgh International Airport.

The segment of the GAP between Ohiopyle and Cumberland is part of the Potomac Heritage National Scenic Trail, one of eight nationally designated scenic trails.[8] It is also part of the September 11th National Memorial Trail.

Notable landmarks along the GAP include:
