The Indianapolis metropolitan area is an 11-county metropolitan area in the U.S. state of Indiana. Its principal cities are Indianapolis, Carmel, Greenwood, and Anderson.[1] Other primary cities with populations of more than 50,000 include Fishers, Noblesville, and Westfield. Located in Central Indiana, it is the largest metropolitan area entirely within Indiana and the seventh largest in the American Midwest.

There are two official metropolitan boundaries for the Indianapolis metro area: the Indianapolis–Carmel–Greenwood, IN Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) and the Indianapolis–Carmel–Muncie, IN Combined Statistical Area (CSA). The two regions are identical except for the addition of three metropolitan areas (Columbus, Kokomo, and Muncie) and six micropolitan statistical areas (Crawfordsville, Greencastle, Greensburg, Seymour, New Castle, and Peru) to the Indianapolis–Carmel–Muncie CSA that are not included in the Indianapolis–Carmel–Greenwood MSA. The population of the MSA was 2,111,040 and the population of the CSA was 2,457,286 as of the 2020 Census.

The Indianapolis metropolitan area is a major center for agribusiness, distribution and logistics, life sciences, manufacturing, and motorsports. In 2021, the gross domestic product of the Indianapolis metropolitan area was (USD) $162.1 billion, among the 30 largest metropolitan economies in the U.S.[4] In 2023, the Indianapolis metropolitan area was home to three Fortune 500 companies and six Fortune 1000 companies. The metropolitan area is home to several higher education institutions, including Anderson University, Butler University, Franklin College, Indiana University Indianapolis, Purdue University in Indianapolis, Marian University, and the University of Indianapolis, among others. Ivy Tech Community College has several campuses throughout the region.

In the 2020 Census, there were 2,111,040 people residing in the MSA. The racial demographics were 69.6% White, 15.0% Black or African-American, 0.4% American Indian or Alaska Native, 3.9% Asian, 4.5% Other and 6.6% Two or More Races. 8.4% of the population were Hispanic or Latino.[6]

As of 2023[update], the Indianapolis–Carmel–Muncie, IN Combined Statistical Area (CSA) consists of four metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) and six micropolitan statistical areas (μSAs) covering 20 counties.[1] In 2022, the CSA's population estimate was 2,631,863, ranking as the 27th largest in the U.S.

The 317 area code covered all of northern and central Indiana until 1948 when the 219 area code was created. Central Indiana remained under the 317 banner until 1997 when growth in and around Indianapolis prompted the creation of 765 area code.

The 317 area code covers the Indianapolis metropolitan area. The counties covered by 317 are Boone, Hancock, Hamilton, Hendricks, Johnson, Madison, Morgan, and Shelby.

According to the Indiana Office of Utility Consumer Counselor, the 317 area code was expected to run out of numbers in 2017.[7] Overlay area code 463 was implemented in late 2016, thereby requiring 10-digit dialing.[8]

In 2021, the gross domestic product of the Indianapolis metropolitan area was (USD) $162.1 billion, among the 30 largest metropolitan economies in the U.S.[4] In 2021, the Indianapolis metropolitan area was home to three Fortune 500 companies and six Fortune 1000 companies.[9] The largest public companies based in the Indianapolis metropolitan area were:

Private companies based in the Indianapolis MSA include financial services company OneAmerica Financial, agricultural cooperative CountryMark, and regional airline Republic Airways Holdings.[11] Other notable companies based in the region include Barnes & Thornburg, Delta Faucet Company, Emmis Corporation, Finish Line, First Internet Bank, Formstack, Group 1001, Hackett Publishing Company, Herff Jones, Hubstaff, Inotiv, KLH Audio, Klipsch Audio Technologies, Lids, Lucas Oil Products, MISO, Pay Less Super Markets, and Steak 'n Shake.

Central Indiana is a global hub for motorsports, specifically American open-wheel car racing.[12] Notable facilities include Anderson Speedway in Anderson, the Indianapolis Motor Speedway in Speedway, Lucas Oil Indianapolis Raceway Park in Brownsburg, and Whiteland Raceway Park in Whiteland, among many others.[13] Racing teams based in the metro area include Andretti Global, Arrow McLaren, Chip Ganassi Racing, Ed Carpenter Racing, and Juncos Hollinger Racing in Indianapolis; Dreyer & Reinbold Racing in Carmel, HMD Motorsports and Wayne Taylor Racing in Brownsburg, and Rahal Letterman Lanigan Racing in Zionsville, among numerous others.[14] Italian racecar manufacturer Dallara opened a facility in Speedway in 2012.[15] Cadillac F1 is headquartered in Fishers.[16]

More than 40 collegiate fraternities and sororities are headquartered in the Indianapolis metropolitan area, the largest concentration in North America.[17][18]

Asterisks (*) denote institutions whose flagship campuses are located outside the Indianapolis MSA. Notable colleges and universities include:

Notable public school districts in the Indianapolis MSA include:

Indiana's "Crossroads of America" moniker is largely attributed to the historical function of the Indianapolis metropolitan area has played as a center for logistics and transportation.

The Indianapolis MSA is a major junction on the United States Interstate Highway System, with four primary and two auxiliary highways:

The Indianapolis metropolitan area is served by several airports, most under the ownership and operation of the Indianapolis Airport Authority, including Eagle Creek Airpark (EYE), Indianapolis Metropolitan Airport (UMP), Indianapolis Regional Airport (MQJ), Hendricks County Airport (2R2), Indianapolis Downtown Heliport (8A4), and the busiest airport in the state, Indianapolis International Airport (IND). In 2022, Indianapolis International served 8.7 million passengers and handled 1.25 million metric tonnes of cargo.[19]

Other airports within the region include:

Indianapolis Union Station is served by Amtrak's Cardinal, which operates thrice-weekly between Chicago and New York City.

Headquartered in Indianapolis, the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) is the preeminent collegiate athletic governing body in the U.S. and Canada, regulating athletes of 1,281 institutions; conferences; organizations; and individuals. The NCAA also organizes the athletic programs of many colleges and universities and helps more than 450,000 college student-athletes who compete annually in college sports.

The Indianapolis metropolitan area hosts several notable sporting events annually, including the Brickyard 400, Grand Prix of Indianapolis, NHRA U.S. Nationals, NFL Scouting Combine, Big Ten Football Championship Game, the largest half marathon in the U.S.,[20] and the largest single-day sporting event in the world, the Indianapolis 500. The cars competing in the latter race are known as IndyCars as a reference to the event. Indianapolis has also been a frequent host of the NCAA Division I Men's and Women's basketball tournaments. Other major sporting events hosted include Pan American Games X in 1987, Super Bowl XLVI in 2012,[21] and the 2013 International Champions Cup between Chelsea F.C. and Inter Milan.[22]

High school sports are highly competitive in Greater Indianapolis. In 2013, MaxPreps ranked Indianapolis No. 3 in its Top 10 Metro Areas for High School Football.[23]
