This is a list of the most populous municipal corporations of the United States. As defined by the United States Census Bureau, an incorporated place includes cities, towns, villages, boroughs, and municipalities.[a] A few exceptional census-designated places (CDPs) are also included in the Census Bureau's listing of incorporated places.[b] Consolidated city-counties represent a distinct type of government that includes the entire population of a county, or county equivalent. Some consolidated city-counties, however, include multiple incorporated places. This list presents only the portion of such consolidated city-counties that are not a part of another incorporated place.

This list refers only to the population of individual municipalities within their defined limits; the populations of other municipalities considered suburbs of a central city are listed separately, and unincorporated areas within urban agglomerations are not included. Therefore, a different ranking is evident when considering U.S. urban areas or metropolitan areas.

This table lists the 346 incorporated places in the United States, excluding the U.S. territories, with a population of at least 100,000 as of July 1, 2024, as estimated by the U.S. Census Bureau. Five states have no cities with populations exceeding 100,000: Delaware, Maine, Vermont, West Virginia, and Wyoming.

The table displays:

The total 2020 enumerated population of all cities over 100,000 is 96,598,047, representing 29.14% of the United States population (excluding territories) and covering a total land area of 29,588 square miles (76,630 km2). The mean city population is 301,765, and the mean density is 4,151 inhabitants per square mile (1,603/km2).

The following table lists the five municipalities (municipios) of Puerto Rico with a population greater than 100,000 on July 1, 2024, as estimated by the United States Census Bureau. If Puerto Rican cities were included among the broader U.S. list, San Juan would rank as the 58th largest city in the country.[citation needed]

The table below contains the following information:

The other U.S. territories — American Samoa, Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, and the U.S. Virgin Islands — have no cities with at least 100,000 people.[4]

The following table lists U.S. census-designated places (CDPs) with populations of at least 100,000 according to the 2020 census. A CDP is a concentration of population identified by the United States Census Bureau for statistical purposes. CDPs are delineated for each decennial census as the statistical counterparts of incorporated places such as cities, towns and villages. CDPs are populated areas that lack separate municipal government, but which otherwise physically resemble incorporated places. Unlike the incorporated cities in the main list, the US Census Bureau does not release annual population estimates for CDPs.

The table below contains the following information:

The following table lists U.S. cities that, in past censuses, have had populations of at least 100,000 but have since decreased beneath this threshold or have been consolidated with or annexed into a neighboring city.[1]
