Seton LaSalle Catholic High School is a private, Roman Catholic high school in Mt. Lebanon, Pennsylvania, a suburb of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.  It is located in the Roman Catholic Diocese of Pittsburgh.

In 2016, Seton LaSalle simplified the format of its name, changing the school's name from "Seton-La Salle Catholic High School" to "Seton LaSalle Catholic High School". However, the original format is still displayed prominently in several places, including the front of the building and the title of this article.

Seton LaSalle has been ranked among the top 50 Catholic high schools in the U.S.[2] The required courses at Seton LaSalle build upon state-mandated courses. Instruction is provided to students in three tracks: Honors, Academic, and General. Also, 16 AP courses are offered.[3] The grading system at Seton LaSalle is similar to some other high schools (especially Catholic high schools) in that an "A" is rewarded for work that receives a 93% through 100%.  Also, Seton LaSalle is accredited by the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools.[1]

Seton LaSalle is a member of the Pennsylvania Interscholastic Athletic Association (PIAA) and the Western Pennsylvania Interscholastic Athletic League (WPIAL) District Seven. The school competes athletically at the WPIAL "AA" level.

Baseball, Basketball (Boys & Girls), Bowling (co-ed), Cheerleading, Crew (co-ed), Cross Country (Boys & Girls), Fencing (co-ed), Football, Golf (Boys & Girls), Lacrosse (Boys & Girls), Soccer (Boys & Girls), Softball, Swimming (co-ed), Tennis (co-ed), and  Volleyball (Boys & Girls).

Seton LaSalle Catholic High School has completed phase one of its athletic field renovation.

Phase II of the project will consist of a field house, toilets and concession stand along with new bleachers and field lights.  Phase II will be completed once sufficient funds have been received.

Already, the field is being used by at least 14 of the school’s athletic teams, and for physical education classes, plus is used by area grade schools and other community groups.

The school was formed in 1979 through the merger of two predecessor schools, South Hills Catholic High School, which was an all-male school run by the Christian Brothers, and Elizabeth Seton High School, an all-female school run by the Sisters of Charity of Seton Hill.[4]
