The School of Public and International Affairs (SPIA) is one of 17 schools comprising the University of Pittsburgh. Founded in 1957 to study national and international public administration, SPIA prides itself on its "Local to Global" distinction.[1] As of 2018, it is one of only two policy schools with programs in the top 20 for both International Relations (Foreign Policy, 2015[2]) and City Management and Urban Policy (U.S. News & World Report, 2018[3]). The former mayor of Pittsburgh, Bill Peduto, is a SPIA alumnus.[4]

SPIA is accredited by the Network of Schools of Public Policy, Affairs, and Administration (NASPAA), and is a member of the Association of Professional Schools of International Affairs (APSIA). The school is located in Wesley W. Posvar Hall on the University of Pittsburgh campus in the Oakland neighborhood of Pittsburgh. In October 2020, Carissa S. Slotterback took over as dean, replacing John Keeler, who returned to the faculty.[5]

In 1957, SPIA (then "GSPIA") was founded by Donald C. Stone in an effort to promote the study of national and international public administration, and to recognize the growing significance of public policy in the global context, and was soon after noted for its breadth and scope.[6]  Stone's philosophy included promoting the notion of "citizenship" and encouraged his colleagues, students, and friends to make government better, to make administrations more effective, and to provide responsible leadership and stewardship for future generations. Stone's  public service career included developing procedures for the Civil Works Administration and planning and implementing the Works Progress Administration. He helped draft the United Nations Charter and his efforts were instrumental in the success of the Marshall Plan in rebuilding Europe after the Second World War.

On March 20, 2025, the school rebranded as SPIA, dropping the "Graduate" portion of its name and launching a new Bachelor of Arts in Public Policy degree[7]

SPIA offers several degree and certificate programs.

SPIA offers several graduate degrees and one undergraduate degree related to public affairs. Full-time students can complete most master's degree programs within 16 months of study, however, programs can be completed on part-time basis. The MPPM degree is designed for mid-career professionals, and can usually be completed in one year of full-time study. The following is a list of degrees and focuses currently available through SPIA.

Starting in 2025, SPIA offers a Bachelor of Arts (BA) in Public Policy degree.

In 2009, SPIA added the Peace Corps Master's International (MI) track that enables students to earn a master's degree in public health and also volunteer with the Peace Corps. This program blends classroom learning with real-world experience for students interested in a career in global health.[10][11]

Additionally, SPIA offers several joint degree programs with other schools within the University of Pittsburgh, as well as with universities within the Pittsburgh Council on Higher Education. The following are a list of available joint degree programs available to students at SPIA.

Certificates from the University Center for International Studies (UCIS) can usually be obtained without requiring additional credit hours, and demonstrate a focus in a particular field of study. The University Center for International Studies at the University of Pittsburgh is home to four internationally recognized area studies centers. Each one has been designated a National Resource Center by the United States Department of Education, certifying their status as leading centers of their kind in the United States. The University Center for International Studies offers Area Studies certificates in the following areas:[12]

In a joint partnership between SPIA and UCIS, students can also obtain a certificate in Global Studies. A certificate in Global Studies provides students with 'global competence.'  Global Studies certificate students choose one of the following six global issues concentrations and unite it with the study of a particular region and language:[12]

SPIA is one of only two schools to have two National Academy of Public Administration fellows elected in one year (William Dunn and Dean John Keeler).[13] It is also one of nine schools to have produced at least two Network of Schools of Public Policy, Affairs, and Administration presidents.[1]

The School of Public & International Affairs is home to several research institutes and centers.

40°26′30″N 79°57′14″W﻿ / ﻿40.441648°N 79.953792°W﻿ / 40.441648; -79.953792
