In This Section Immigrant and Refugee Affairs Organizers of special events that expect 200 or more individuals per day are required, under City Code , to separate recyclables from municipal waste. The following materials are required to be recycled for both pre and post recycling activities at special events: White office paper Shredded paper (in a sealed paper bag Greasy pizza boxes Paper plates or other food service ware items Bottles, jugs, jars, and tubs (3 gallons or less).

Plastics such as: Clamshell take-out containers Storage containers/trash cans Amber, blue, red, green, and clear bottles and jugs (3 gallons or less).

Plate, drink or dinnerware Must be flattened and placed into another box or bin for collection.

Greasy pizza boxes Plastic packing material (Styrofoam™, bubble wrap, plastic wrap, packing pellets, etc.) Empty aluminum, aerosol, & steel cans. Leave labels on, discard lids or leave attached to can.

Loose metal lids and bottle caps Aluminum pans and foil Food Waste diversion is not mandatory at special events in The City of Pittsburgh; however, it is highly encouraged that event producers make it available for food vendors and attendee stations at festivals, fairs, and venues. For a list of vendors visit our You can either: Hire a private hauler to collect your recycling Self-haul recyclables collected at your event to a City of Pittsburgh recycling drop-off or a recycling processor Pack-In/Pack-Out: Talk with your vendors and/or fellow event coordinators to understand who, what, where and how many materials will be generated. Establish ownership of these materials and eliminate waste whenever possible.

Develop and coordinate a plan for handling and recycling the materials once collected: Find out what programs or equipment are already available on-site at your venue. Existing infrastructure may be sufficient for your needs.

Arrange for the storage and/or return of loaned equipment (City-owned equipment must be returned the following business day).

Once you have developed your plan, be sure to actively communicate expectations/availability of recycling and disposal options with your visitors, staff and/or volunteers.

Best Management Practices Always pair your trash and recycling containers together to make disposal options both obvious and convenient for your attendees and to prevent confusion and/or contamination.

Use different colored bags for your trash and recycling to make sure separated materials are kept separate throughout the handling process.

Break down and flatten any and all corrugated cardboard boxes and place them all on a pallet or designated collection area.

One of the biggest challenges facing recycling right now is contamination by wishful recycling or “wish-cycling”. This happens when non-recyclable objects are placed in the recycling bin with the wish it will be recycled. Additionally, recycling contamination occurs when food residue, liquids, and unacceptable materials—such as bagged recyclables, plastic bags, plastic films, plastic packaging, electronics, hazardous waste, Styrofoam, batteries, sharps, food waste, greasy pizza boxes, and other durable goods like Tupperware, storage containers, or even plastic hangers—are placed in the recycling can. Contaminants not only degrade the materials, boosting costs, but they can potentially cause harm to the Material Recovery Facility (MRF) and city employees.

While these items are not accepted at special events, click for waste disposal resources.

The City of Pittsburgh’s Recycling Division is available to assist you in recycling at your event.

Assistance provided may include: Determining logistics for recycling Loaning collection equipment Providing collection at end of your event Event organizers must organize volunteers or provide staff for the collection, maintenance, and supervision of collection containers during your event.

Please see the to see our current pricing information. We are also willing to waive fees for events/organizers willing to self-service equipment from our office.

Clearstream Recycling Stands Color-coded, collapsible stands with selective opening lids and labels for collecting co-mingled recyclables.

Measurements: 40" x 25" x 3/4" (Folded) 40" x 25" x 18" (Opened) Cube Carts (0.75 yd³) May be used to store and secure up to 25 clearstream stands and lids or to transport materials on-site during the event (Minimum order of 15 clearstream containers to reserve cube carts) Measurements: 49.25"l x 32.5"w x 38.75"h Recycling bags may also be included upon request at no additional charge (Recommended minimum bag size 40-45 gal 40" x 46") last updated: 09/09/2025 Back to top