closed on .

City Cuts is the City of Pittsburgh’s lawn cutting program for our older neighbors, our veteran neighbors, and our neighbors with disabilities who do not have the means to cut their own grass.

In 2025, services will be provided twice a month (weather permitting) from early summer through early mid-fall.

Applicants must reside in the City of Pittsburgh limits, own the property or be responsible for the grass cutting of the property, lack social or financial means to cut their own lawns, and meet one or more of the follow qualifications: Be 62 years or older Be a veteran Have a disability that prohibits you from cutting grass Service is limited and applications will be accepted on a first come, first served basis.

We are currently looking for Pittsburgh landscapers and contractors to participate in the City Cuts Program. The City offers competitive rates, with payments based on square footage per yard. If you or someone you know is interested, click to apply below!

Yes! Please see ways to apply to the right.

I am a renter requesting assistance with cutting the grass in my yard. I live in the City of Pittsburgh. Do I qualify for City Cuts?

Yes! You can apply for the program if you can confirm that you are responsible for the grass cutting and you are 62 years of age or older, disabled, a veteran, and/or low income.

I qualify! How do I sign up?

I’d like to request assistance for a friend or family member. May I request service on their behalf?

How will I be notified if I am accepted into the program?

Will the contractor who cuts my lawn be insured?

Yes. The City hires contractors through a procurement process. All contractors are required to provide their own insurance.

How often will my grass be cut?

Services will be provided twice a month (weather permitting) from mid-May through October.

Are other services provided besides grass cutting?

No. The City Cuts program is limited to grass cutting, only.

No, but please expect a cut every two weeks. Since grass cutting services are based on the cooperation of the weather, one rainy afternoon can shift the course of a week’s work.

414 Grant Street Pittsburgh, PA 15219 Questions or Concerns? Dial 3-1-1 or use the last updated: 07/15/2025 Back to top