In This Section Roving Art Cart Bach, Beethoven and Brunch Jam At Grandview Reservoir of Jazz Pittsburgh Cultural Activities Film & Event Management Grab a blanket or lawn chair and head to a park to enjoy the City's free concert series!

Please Note: The City of Pittsburgh does not allow campaigning or signature gathering at any of its event locations.

Bach, Beethoven and Brunch Sundays: June 22 - (no concert July 6) a.m. - Noon, Mellon Park, Fifth Avenue and Shady Avenue, Point Breeze/Squirrel Hill This longtime favorite series entertains music lovers on the lawn at Mellon Park. Satisfy your appetite for classical music by treating yourself to a special Sunday morning composed of Bach, Beethoven and Brunch. Don't miss the "Best Brunch" competition during intermission!

Series presented by Citizens and supported by WQED-FM 89.3 Jam at Grandview Saturdays: August 2 - 30, 2025 7 - 8:30 p.m., Grandview Park Bandstand - Bailey Avenue, Mt. Washington Enjoy live tunes, local brews, and Pittsburgh's best views! This brand new concert series features the sparkling downtown skyline as a backdrop on Saturday evenings in August. The Jam At Grandview - JAG! - performances combine live rock music with a rotating selection of local ales, ciders and wines to create immaculate vibes on Mt. Washington.

Jam at Grandview Schedule Reservoir of Jazz Sundays: August 3 - 31, 2025 | 5-7 PM Relax on the lawn at Highland Park to sounds of jazz performed by Pittsburgh's finest musicians. Residents of the tri-state area look forward to late summer to witness this area's rich talent showcase at the ever-popular Reservoir of Jazz series. After the concerts, stay for Reservoir of Jazz Schedule Stars at Riverview Series Saturdays: June 7 - | 7-8:30 PM "Stars at Riverview" brings amazing music to Riverview Park on Saturday evenings. So bring a lawn chair or spread a blanket on Observatory Hill for an entire summer of incredible musical entertainment. After the concerts, stay for

Please Note: Inclement weather may cause cancellations.

2025 concert schedule subject to change last updated: 05/08/2025 Back to top