In This Section 2025 Governing Agenda Letters of Support Forms My Brother's Keeper Key Focus Areas Pittsburgh Innovation Team Boards, Authorities, Commissions Finance & Budget Issued by the Mayor of the City of Pittsburgh in accordance with applicable law, including City of Pittsburgh Code §113.03 and the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Services Code, 35 Pa. C.S.

§§7101 et seq., as it pertains to the existing disaster emergency.

Today the Finance department will send a Taxing Jurisdiction Exemption Challenge to the Allegheny County’s Office of Property Assessments for 26 parcels.

Today Mayor Ed Gainey issued an executive order directing the Finance and Law Departments to review the status of all tax-exempt property in the City of Pittsburgh owned by charities to ensure that the special tax-exempt status is appropriate under Pennsylvania law, and, if not, to act accordingly.

Today Mayor Ed Gainey signed an Executive Order rescinding a previous executive order from then Mayor Bill Peduto which created a Board of Nominators to select appointments for the Pittsburgh Water and Sewer Authority Board of Directors.

Mayor Ed Gainey and Governor Tom Wolf announced today that up to $25.3 million in federal funding has been made available for the repair of Fern Hollow Bridge.

Mayor Ed Gainey will sign a Declaration of Disaster Emergency for the City of Pittsburgh for the next several days.

The City of Pittsburgh has announced that all employees are required to be fully vaccinated against COVID-19 by in order to protect employees as well as the public they serve.

Mayor William Peduto issued an Executive Order today calling to allow the possession and use of fentanyl test strips, a key opioid overdose prevention tool, in the City of Pittsburgh.

Mayor William Peduto signed an Executive Order today for the development and implementation of a Youth Bullying Prevention Policy to cover all youth-focused programming provided by the City of Pittsburgh.

Please open the Executive Order for details.

Today, Mayor William Peduto issued an Executive Order to create a unified, City-led deconstruction policy designed to remediate blight in city neighborhoods while diverting building materials from landfills, advancing climate action goals, promoting equity, and creating job training opportunities.

Following lengthy study by a construction industry tax force, Mayor William Peduto today signed an Executive Order to cut down on construction fraud, promote worker safety and protect City tax revenue.

Mayor William Peduto issued a sweeping Earth Day Executive Order today that builds upon Pittsburgh’s leadership in fighting climate change by committing the city to become fully carbon-neutral by 2050.

Mayor William Peduto today declared a State of Emergency in the City of Pittsburgh and signed an Executive Order prohibiting all public gatherings of more than 250 people, effective 9 a.m. Monday.

Mayor William Peduto today signed an Executive Order creating the City’s Office of Equity, which will work across City of Pittsburgh government to embed the importance of equity in government work, and address and eradicate inequalities in all its forms.

Mayor William Peduto issued an Executive Order today outlining City objectives and expectations for the safe testing of autonomous vehicles in Pittsburgh, and assigning responsibilities for the development of transparent and constructive reporting guidelines for the growing technology sector.

Mayor William Peduto today issued an Executive Order directing all City authorities to consider 17 workforce improvements his administration has advanced for city employees and residents.

Mayor William Peduto, in conjunction with the city's Construction Industry Task Force, today signed two Executive Orders supporting growth of the construction industry and access to family-supporting union jobs for city residents.

Mayor William Peduto joined community partners today to announce an Executive Order creating a Paid Safe Leave policy for city employees victimized by domestic abuse.

The Mayor understands the need and importance for gender equity in the City of Pittsburgh.

Mayor William Peduto today issued an Executive Order adopting recommendations of his Blue Ribbon Panel on restructuring Pittsburgh Water & Sewer Authority governance.

Mayor William Peduto today signed an Executive Order to support the local construction industry and new job training opportunities in Pittsburgh.

Mayor William Peduto today issued an Executive Order to further promote climate control initiatives, in the wake of President Trump's disastrous decision to pull the United States out of the Paris Climate Accords of 2015.

In honor of Earth Day, Mayor William Peduto issued an Executive Order today calling for new ways to protect City trees, which cover 40% of Pittsburgh's land area and are vital to the City's parks, green spaces, and quality of life.

Mayor William Peduto today issued an Executive Order adopting measures to promote diversity in City hiring, similar to an initiative backed by late Steelers Chairman Dan Rooney within the National Football League.

Mayor William Peduto today issued three new executive orders to begin implementing recommendations by the City Housing Task Force, covering ways to encourage building of affordable housing.

Mayor William Peduto today issued two executive orders to begin implementing recommendations by the City Housing Task Force, covering ways to protect people from losing their housing.

Mayor William Peduto signed an executive order today requiring that all full-time City employees be paid no less than $15 per hour.

Mayor William Peduto today named a Mayor's Blue Ribbon Panel on Early Childhood Education to help the city seek funding for a preschool development grant program the White House announced in the Hill District earlier this month.

Mayor William Peduto issued an Executive Order today that will bring new efficiency and transparency to the City of Pittsburgh's spending and budgeting procedures.

Mayor William Peduto issued an executive order today enacting a long-term, strategic investment and maintenance plan for city-owned facilities, as part of the City's comprehensive fixed asset management system.

In his first executive order, Mayor William Peduto today announced a ban on elected officials from having their names placed on city property such as city vehicles or trash cans. The executive order also requires that names of previous mayors will be removed from city property. Mayor Peduto's name will not be printed, painted, or engraved on any long-term city property.

Mayor William Peduto today announced the City's commitment to adopt a complete streets policy for Pittsburgh's public rights of way.

Mayor William Peduto’s office today issued an executive order outlining new controls on city spending.

Mayor William Peduto issued an executive order today announcing the creation of a Mayoral Task Force on Summer Youth Employment Opportunities in order to assess the City of Pittsburgh's Summer Youth Employment Program. The task force will be charged with presenting concrete recommendations and an action plan for expanding access and improving the quality and diversity of placement opportunities.

Back to top