In This Section Film & Event Management Citiparks Phone Directory Park Rangers Gallery 10/2: Tabling Thursday Details: Come explore Pittsburgh’s newest city park with the Park Rangers! We will be walking approximately 2 miles on intermediate to advanced difficulty single track trails throughout the gorgeous glens and meadows of Hays Woods. This is an educational program about edible and medical plants and fungi. We will discuss safe, legal, and sustainable foraging practices, but will NOT harvest on the hike. Bring sturdy close toed shoes and water. Dogs are welcome on leash. Registration is not required but recommended for updates and cancelations due to weather.

10/6: Monday Meetup Details: Join the Emerald View Park Rangers for a free activity at Emerald View Park’s playgrounds, perfect for all ages. Create a Nighttime Critter, using your imagination to bring to life a creature that roams under the cover of darkness. No registration is required—just come by and join the fun. We look forward to seeing you there!

10/9: Tabling Thursday Time: 4:30-6:00 PM Details: A guided nature photography hike through Frick Park. Learn techniques to capture nature using a camera or just your smartphone!

Registration Link: Registration is optional but recommended.

10/13: Monday Meetup Details: Join the Emerald View Park Rangers for a free activity at Emerald View Park’s playgrounds, perfect for all ages. Create a Nighttime Critter, using your imagination to bring to life a creature that roams under the cover of darkness. No registration is required—just come by and join the fun. We look forward to seeing you there!

10/13: Wightman Park Days Location: Wightman Park (5612 Solway St. PGH PA 15217) Details: Join your Pittsburgh Park Rangers for a quick, free tabling activity at the Wightman Park playground! No registration required.

Time: 9AM - 10AM Details: Join Ranger Stevie for a photography walk,bring your phone, wipe the dust off those cameras and let’s capture the beauty of our eldest CityPark in Pittsburgh. Ranger Stevie a photographer herself can assist with basic camera questions and settings as well as sharing the beautiful history of Allegheny Commons Park.

10/16: Tabling Thursday Details: Come explore Pittsburgh’s newest city park with the Park Rangers! We will hike out to the overlooks and discuss the land use history of this urban woodland. We will be walking approximately 2 miles on intermediate difficulty single track trails throughout the park. Bring sturdy closed toed shoes and water. Dogs are welcome on leash. Registration is not required but recommended for updates and cancelations due to weather.

Details: Experience the beauty of fall as Ranger Marya guides you through the lush trails from Olympia Park to the iconic Point of View. This nearly 4-mile hike will take you through some of the most picturesque parts of Emerald View Park, where you’ll be surrounded by vibrant autumn colors and crisp, fresh air.

Whether you're a seasoned hiker or just looking for a relaxing way to enjoy the season, this hike offers a perfect blend of exercise, nature, and breathtaking views of the city skyline. Don’t forget your camera – the Point of View offers one of the best panoramic views of Pittsburgh!

What to Bring: Comfortable hiking shoes Water and snacks A camera or smartphone for photos We’ll gather at Olympia Park, at the Hallock St parking lot, before heading out on our adventure. Bathroom facilities are available near the meeting point.

10/20: Wightman Park Days Location: Wightman Park (5612 Solway St. PGH PA 15217) Details: Join your Pittsburgh Park Rangers for a quick, free tabling activity at the Wightman Park playground! No registration required.

10/23: Tabling Thursday 10/24: Treats and Trails Registration Link: Registration is optional but recommended.

10/27: Wightman Park Days Location: Wightman Park (5612 Solway St. PGH PA 15217) Details: Join your Pittsburgh Park Rangers for a quick, free tabling activity at the Wightman Park playground! No registration required.

Details: Meet at the Allegheny Observatory. We will begin with a one hour hike with Pittsburgh Park Rangers, stopping occasionally to learn about local nocturnal animals. We will be hiking during the sunset. We will be going at a slow pace, but the trail is sometimes rugged with elevation changes. This is a weather dependent event and will be cancelled even if just very cloudy. Please wear proper footwear and dress for the weather. Afterwards, we will spend one hour touring the Allegheny Observatory and participants will be able to view the moon through the Observatory's historical telescope!

10/30: Tabling Thursday Time: 6:00PM- 7:30PM Details: Come explore Pittsburgh’s newest city park with the Park Rangers! On this special NIGHT hike we will explore the forest from dusk into dark. Red light flashlights will be provided, we will call for owls, and tell stories about the parks strange history. Bring sturdy closed toed shoes and water. Quiet on leash dogs are welcome. Registration is not required but recommended for updates and cancelations due to weather. More information available on Eventbrite.

9/2: Tabling Tuesday Details: Come join your Frick Park Rangers and Match that Scat! Tabling Tuesdays are free, educational activities for Frick Park’s playgrounds. No registration required!

Details: Join Ranger Chris to learn the trails of Frick Park! Over the course of this hiking series participants will familiarize themselves with different walking loops under 2.5 miles in length. Participants are encouraged to wear closed toe shoes and pack their own water bottles. This hike series is open to all ages and friendly leashed dogs. Registration is recommended for updates and in event of weather cancellation.

For August hikes in this series, we will be meeting at the bowling green area of Frick Park (use residential address of 7317 Reynolds Street) to explore the northern most section of the park. Ample street parking is available along Reynolds Street and a portable bathroom unit will be available. Please pack your own water. This hike will be approximately 1.45 miles long and will be a gradual pace with a 125-elevation gain. All trails will be wide and covered in mostly compressed limestone.

Details: Come explore Pittsburgh’s newest city park with the Park Rangers! We will be walking approximately 2 miles on intermediate to advanced difficulty single track trails throughout the gorgeous glens and meadows of Hays woods. Bring sturdy close toed shoes and water. Dogs are welcome on leash. Registration is not required but recommended for updates and cancelations due to weather.

9/4: Tabling Thursday 9/8: Monday Meetup Details: Join the Emerald View Park Rangers for a free activity at Emerald View Park’s playgrounds, perfect for all ages. Test your nature knowledge with one of our Matching Games! No registration is required—just come by and join the fun. We look forward to seeing you there!

Location: Cowboy Hill (nearest address: 7401 Ben Hur St. Pittsburgh, PA 15208) Registration: Register Here!

9/9: Tabling Tuesday Details: Come join your Frick Park Rangers and make a Pinecone Birdfeeder! Tabling Tuesdays are free, educational activities for Frick Park’s playgrounds. No registration required!

9/11: Tabling Thursday 9/13: Sunset Hike Details: Come out and hike with Pittsburgh Park Rangers through the trails of the beautiful Riverview Park during golden hour! Rangers will share interesting insights about the park, the environment, history, etc. This will be a moderate hike with elevation changes. Please wear appropriate footwear and bring water.

9/15: Monday Meetup Details: Join the Emerald View Park Rangers for a free activity at Emerald View Park’s playgrounds, perfect for all ages. Test your nature knowledge with one of our Matching Games! No registration is required—just come by and join the fun. We look forward to seeing you there!

9/15: Wightman Park Days Location: Wightman Park (5612 Solway St. PGH PA 15217) Details: Join your Pittsburgh Park Rangers for a quick, free tabling activity at the Wightman Park playground! No registration required.

9/16: Tabling Tuesday Details: Come join your Frick Park Rangers and play a Nocturnal Animals Matching Game! Tabling Tuesdays are free, educational activities for Frick Park’s playgrounds. No registration required!

For August hikes in this series, we will be meeting at the bowling green area of Frick Park (use residential address of 7317 Reynolds Street) to explore the northern most section of the park. This will be the FINAL introduction to Frick Park Trails for the 2025 season! During this hike we will learn a loop path to connect the Point Breeze side of the park to the Regent Square community. Participants should prepare for a 2-mile loop with 184ft 9/16: Tabling Tuesday Details: Come join your Frick Park Rangers and play a Nocturnal Animals Matching Game! Tabling Tuesdays are free, educational activities for Frick Park’s playgrounds. No registration required!

Details: Join Ranger Erica to learn the trails of Frick Park! Over the course of this hiking series participants will familiarize themselves with different walking loops under 2.5 miles in length. Participants are encouraged to wear closed toe shoes and pack their own water bottles. This hike series is open to all ages and friendly leashed dogs. Registration is recommended for updates and in event of weather cancellation.

For August hikes in this series, we will be meeting at the bowling green area of Frick Park (use residential address of 7317 Reynolds Street) to explore the northern most section of the park. This will be the FINAL introduction to Frick Park Trails for the 2025 season! During this hike we will learn a loop path to connect the Point Breeze side of the park to the Regent Square community. Participants should prepare for a 2-mile loop with 184ft elevation gain. Terrains will vary including crush limestone pathways, descending wooden steps, and crossing asphalt covered roads.

9/18: Tabling Thursday Details: Come explore Pittsburgh’s newest city park with the Park Rangers! On this hike we will hunt for some of the fascinating fungi that grow in abundance around the Hays Woods. We will be walking approximately 2 miles on intermediate difficulty single track trails throughout the park. Bring sturdy closed toed shoes and water. Dogs are welcome on leash. Registration is not required but recommended for updates and cancelations due to weather.

Details: Come join Ranger Marya for a Guided Hike along Grandview Avenue in Emerald View Park! This event is the perfect opportunity to explore the world-class views of Pittsburgh from the Grand View Scenic Byway. We will meet outside the Monongahela Incline Upper Station and embark on a memorable journey. Get ready to immerse yourself in the beauty of our city's overlooks while enjoying the company of fellow hikers. Don't miss out on this incredible adventure!

Grab your comfy walking shoes for this roughly 2 mile hike from the Mon Incline to the Point of View statue and back again. We will be walking at steady pace with several opportunities for picture taking along the way (cameras are recommended). There will be a street crossing and some elevation gain. Parking is on-street and metered along Grandview Ave. We recommend filled water bottles and well secured hats and/or sunscreen as there is little shade. Bathroom facilities are available at the Mt. Washington Library.

9/20: Art in the Park at Riverview: Details : Art in the park is a great program for anyone who likes both art and nature! Rangers will provide the proper materials such as paint, brushes, canvasses, etc. All you have to do is register on the eventbrite and show up with your own creative ideas. This is an outdoor (and weather dependent) event where we will enjoy the beautiful views in front of the Allegheny Observatory.

*This is not a class, but an opportunity to make art in nature with provided materials 9/22: Monday Meetup Location: Mt. Washington Park Playground (Norton St, Pittsburgh, PA 15211) Details: Join the Emerald View Park Rangers for a free activity at Emerald View Park’s playgrounds, perfect for all ages. Test your nature knowledge with one of our Matching Games! No registration is required—just come by and join the fun. We look forward to seeing you there!

9/22: Wightman Park Days Location: Wightman Park (5612 Solway St. PGH PA 15217) Details: Join your Pittsburgh Park Rangers for a quick, free tabling activity at the Wightman Park playground! No registration required.

9/23: Tabling Tuesday Details: Come join your Frick Park Rangers and make a Bat Craft! Tabling Tuesdays are free, educational activities for Frick Park’s playgrounds. No registration required!

9/25: Tabling Thursday 9/29: Wightman Park Days Location: Wightman Park (5612 Solway St. PGH PA 15217) Details: Join your Pittsburgh Park Rangers for a quick, free tabling activity at the Wightman Park playground! No registration required.

8/4: Monday Meetup Details: Join the Emerald View Park Rangers for a free activity at Emerald View Park’s playgrounds, perfect for all ages. Have fun making a colorful beaded Friendship Bracelet! No registration is required—just come by and join the fun. We look forward to seeing you there!

8/5: National Night Out Details: Join your Pittsburgh Park Rangers and local environmental and community representatives from over 20 different organizations to celebrate National Night Out! National Night Out is a public safety initiative to foster relationships between public safety personnel and their communities. This family friendly event is full of crafts, games, scavenger hunts and appearances by public safety!

For the August hikes in this series, we will be meeting at the Biddle Building in Frick Park at 800 South Braddock Ave in Regent Square at 5:00. Parking is available in the parking lot or along the street. A bathroom and water fountain will be available if needed at the beginning and end of this hike. This hike will explore the Regent Square side of the park. This hike will be about 2.2 miles and be an easy-pace hike. Most of the hike will be a downhill graded slope or flat terrain, however, will require participants to take a staircase at the end of the hike back to the parking lot.

Details: Join your Pittsburgh Park Rangers for an age 50+ guided hike series featuring the City of Pittsburgh’s Regional Parks! This hike series will focus on shorter hikes (under 2 miles) for beginner hikers. All hikes will be a slow-to-light pace with few stopping points throughout! Participants are urged to wear closed toe shoes, wear sunscreen, and pack a water bottle for this hike series. Registration is not required but recommended for updates and cancellations due to inclement weather. Registration opens June 1st!

8/7: Tabling Thursday 8/11: Monday Meetup Details: Join the Emerald View Park Rangers for a free activity at Emerald View Park’s playgrounds, perfect for all ages. Have fun making a colorful beaded Friendship Bracelet! No registration is required—just come by and join the fun. We look forward to seeing you there!

8/11: Small Park Series 8/11 Wightman Park Days Location: Wightman Park (5612 Solway St. PGH PA 15217) Details: Join your Pittsburgh Park Rangers for a quick, free tabling activity at the Wightman Park playground! No registration required.

8/12: Tabling Tuesday Details: Come join your Frick Park Rangers and make a coffee filter butterfly! Tabling Tuesdays are free, educational activities for Frick Park’s playgrounds. No registration required!

8/14: Tabling Thursday Details: Come join Ranger Marya for a nice relaxing 1-mile guided hike through the scenic Emerald View Park. We will meet at the parking lot on Hallock St. Please wear comfortable closed-toe shoes and bring water to stay hydrated. This hike is on narrow trails with uneven terrain and sidewalks. There is some moderate elevation.

As we trek, your friendly Park Ranger will share interesting insights about the park. Discover hidden gems like old house foundations, old mine drainage, and over 200 year old oak trees. This guided hike is not only educational but also a great way to connect with nature and meet fellow outdoor enthusiasts. We will be doing a leisurely pace with regular stops for taking in the view and sipping some water. There are bathroom facilities near the parking lot. This hike is open to everyone, whether you’re a seasoned hiker or just starting out. It’s a perfect way to enjoy the outdoors and learn something new about Emerald View Park. We hope to see you there!

Details: Rangers will lead a guided hike through the trails of Riverview Park, bringing along different local animal hides. We will stop several times throughout the hike to talk about each mammal. This will be a moderate hike with elevation changes. Please wear appropriate footwear and bring water.

8/18: Monday Meetup Details: Join the Emerald View Park Rangers for a free activity at Emerald View Park’s playgrounds, perfect for all ages. Have fun making a colorful beaded Friendship Bracelet! No registration is required—just come by and join the fun. We look forward to seeing you there!

8/18: Small Park Series 8/18 Wightman Park Days Location: Wightman Park (5612 Solway St. PGH PA 15217) Details: Join your Pittsburgh Park Rangers for a quick, free tabling activity at the Wightman Park playground! No registration required.

8/19: Tabling Tuesday Details: Come join your Frick Park Rangers and play a beehive matching game! Tabling Tuesdays are free, educational activities for Frick Park’s playgrounds. No registration required!

For the August hikes in this series, we will be meeting at the Biddle Building in Frick Park at 800 South Braddock Ave in Regent Square at 5:00. Parking is available in the parking lot or along the street. This hike will explore a single-track trail and how to easily make a 1.9-mile loop with it. Participants should be prepared for narrow trails with uneven terrain in addition be prepared for steps. The hike will move at a slow pace with a gradual downhill slope for most of the hike. We will be crossing the fern hollow bridge so please be comfortable with heights. There will be a bathroom and water available at the start of the hike.

8/21: Tabling Thursday 8/25: Monday Meetup Location: Mt. Washington Park Playground (Norton, Pittsburgh, PA 15211) Details: Join the Emerald View Park Rangers for a free activity at Emerald View Park’s playgrounds, perfect for all ages. Have fun making a colorful beaded Friendship Bracelet! No registration is required—just come by and join the fun. We look forward to seeing you there!

8/25: Small Park Series 8/25 Wightman Park Days Location: Wightman Park (5612 Solway St. PGH PA 15217) Details: Join your Pittsburgh Park Rangers for a quick, free tabling activity at the Wightman Park playground! No registration required.

8/26: Tabling Tuesday Details: Come join your Frick Park Rangers and make leaf rubbings! Tabling Tuesdays are free, educational activities for Frick Park’s playgrounds. No registration required!

8/28: Tabling Thursday 7/1: Tabling Tuesday Details: Come join your Frick Park Rangers and learn about our Feathered Friends! Tabling Tuesdays are free, educational activities for Frick Park’s playgrounds. No registration required!

For July hikes, we will be meeting at the lower parking lot in Frick Park (use nearest residential address of 1027 Lancaster Ave and proceed down the hill to the parking lot) at 5:00PM. There is a port-a-john available, however participants should pack their own water bottles. On this hike we will explore the wetland areas of Frick Park. Participants should prepare for 1.95mi hike with 79ft of elevation gain. This hike will be a very slow and gradual pace with little elevation change.

Location: Riverview Park (nearest residential address: 1 Riverview Ave.) Details: Join your Pittsburgh Park Rangers for an age 50+ guided hike series featuring the City of Pittsburgh’s Regional Parks! This hike series will focus on shorter hikes (under 2 miles) for beginner hikers. All hikes will be a slow-to-light pace with few stopping points throughout! Participants are urged to wear closed toe shoes, wear sunscreen, and pack a water bottle for this hike series. Registration is not required but recommended for updates and cancellations due to inclement weather. Registration opens June 1st!

7/3: Tabling Thursday 7/7: Monday Meetup Details: Join the Emerald View Park Rangers for a free activity at Emerald View Park’s playgrounds, perfect for all ages. Paint a charming little Birdhouse to brighten your space, combining creativity and nature with vibrant colors and unique designs! No registration is required—just come by and join the fun. We look forward to seeing you there!

7/8: Tabling Tuesday Details: Come join your Frick Park Rangers and try our Bird Egg Matching Game! Tabling Tuesdays are free, educational activities for Frick Park’s playgrounds. No registration required!

7/10: Tabling Thursday 7/14: Monday Meetup Details: Join the Emerald View Park Rangers for a free activity at Emerald View Park’s playgrounds, perfect for all ages. Paint a charming little Birdhouse to brighten your space, combining creativity and nature with vibrant colors and unique designs! No registration is required—just come by and join the fun. We look forward to seeing you there!

7/14: Small Park Series 7/14 Wightman Park Days Location: Wightman Park (5612 Solway St. PGH PA 15217) Details: Join your Pittsburgh Park Rangers for a quick, free tabling activity at the Wightman Park playground! No registration required.

7/15: Tabling Tuesday Details: Come join your Frick Park Rangers and enjoy an Art Break! Tabling Tuesdays are free, educational activities for Frick Park’s playgrounds. No registration required!

For July hikes, we will be meeting at the lower parking lot in Frick Park (use nearest residential address of 1027 Lancaster Ave and proceed down the hill to the parking lot) at 5:00PM. There is a port-a-john available, however participants should pack their own water bottles. This hike will be about 2.5 miles and explore the innermost trails of the park and will feature some of the more difficult single-track trails. Participants must wear closed toe shoes and be prepared for uneven terrain, elevation changes and narrow trails.

7/17: Tabling Thursday Details: Come join Ranger Marya for an exhilarating 2.1-mile guided hike through the scenic Emerald View Park. We will meet at the parking lot on E. Sycamore St. and head up the hill from there. Please wear comfortable closed-toe shoes and bring water to stay hydrated. This hike is on narrow trails with uneven terrain and sidewalks. There is some elevation gain, so there is a fitness element. As we trek, your friendly Park Ranger will share interesting insights about the park.

We will be doing a leisurely pace with regular stops for taking in the view, sipping some water, or catching our breath. There are toilets and a drinking fountain available at the halfway point in Grandview Park which offers breathtaking views from one of the city's best overlooks.

This hike is open to everyone, whether you’re a seasoned hiker or just starting out. It’s a perfect way to enjoy the outdoors and learn something new about Emerald View Park. We hope to see you there!

Details: This guided hike will include history about the Allegheny Observatory, the Old Riverview Zoo, the Chapel Shelter, and more! We will begin at the Visitor Center before we work our way through the trails. This will be a moderate hike with elevation changes. Please wear appropriate footwear and bring water.

7/21: Monday Meetup Details: Join the Emerald View Park Rangers for a free activity at Emerald View Park’s playgrounds, perfect for all ages. Paint a charming little Birdhouse to brighten your space, combining creativity and nature with vibrant colors and unique designs! No registration is required—just come by and join the fun. We look forward to seeing you there!

7/21: Small Park Series 7/21 Wightman Park Days Location: Wightman Park (5612 Solway St. PGH PA 15217) Details: Join your Pittsburgh Park Rangers for a quick, free tabling activity at the Wightman Park playground! No registration required.

7/22: Tabling Tuesday Details: Come join your Frick Park Rangers and learn about Animal Adapatations! Tabling Tuesdays are free, educational activities for Frick Park’s playgrounds. No registration required!

7/24: Tabling Thursday 7/28: Monday Meetup Location: Mt. Washington Park Playground (Norton St, Pittsburgh, PA 15211) Details: Join the Emerald View Park Rangers for a free activity at Emerald View Park’s playgrounds, perfect for all ages. Paint a charming little Birdhouse to brighten your space, combining creativity and nature with vibrant colors and unique designs! No registration is required—just come by and join the fun. We look forward to seeing you there!

7/28: Small Park Series 7/28 Wightman Park Days Location: Wightman Park (5612 Solway St. PGH PA 15217) Details: Join your Pittsburgh Park Rangers for a quick, free tabling activity at the Wightman Park playground! No registration required.

7/31: Tabling Thursday Location: Frick Park, above Braddock Trail. Nearest address: 1113 Richmond St. Pittsburgh, PA 15218) Details: Join your Frick Park Rangers for a conservation related service event in the park! This month we will be weeding and mulching a tree planting site along Braddock Trail. Registration recommended but not required!

6/2: Monday Meetup Details: Join the Emerald View Park Rangers for a free activity at Emerald View Park’s playgrounds, perfect for all ages. Immerse yourself in nature and spark your creativity with our vibrant Coffee Filter Butterfly craft! No registration is required—just come by and join the fun. We look forward to seeing you there!

6/3: Tabling Tuesday Details: Come join your Frick Park Rangers and learn about make a Glove Greenhouse! Tabling Tuesdays are free, educational activities for Frick Park’s playgrounds. No registration required!

Location: Blue Slide Playground (Nearest residential address: 2466 Beechwood Blvd.) Details: Join Ranger Erica to learn the trails of Frick Park! Over the course of this hiking series participants will familiarize themselves with different walking loops under 2.5 miles in length. Participants are encouraged to wear closed toe shoes and pack their own water bottles. This hike series is open to all ages and friendly leashed dogs. Registration is recommended for updates and in event of weather cancellation.

For the June Hikes, we will meet at the Blue Slide Playground entrance to Frick Park (use nearest residential address of: 2466 Beechwood Blvd.) at 5:00. Street parking is plentiful and/or park on English Lane (behind the playground). During this hike we will explore the Squirrel Hill entrance to the park and explore the trail networks beyond the paved Riverview trail segment. This hike will be about 2.2 miles long. There will be a port-a-john near the entrance, participants should bring their own water bottles. This hike will be a short descent and a very gradual slope for about half the hike. We will walk at a slow to moderate pace. Please be prepared for mud and wear closed toe shoes with good traction.

Details: Rangers will lead an hour-long hike under the nearly full moon. This hike will be taken at a leisurely pace with 3 educational stops. There is some rough terrain and slight elevation changes, as well as some stairs. We try to be guided only by the light of the moon, but flashlights are acceptable if necessary. This event happens before the actual full moon because it’s position in the sky is more easily observed with telescopes on these days.

After the hike, we will spend the last hour touring the Allegheny Observatory and viewing the moon through the telescopes. Registration is required so we can notify you of cancellations. This is a weather dependent event and will be cancelled if it’s too cloudy.

6/5: Tabling Thursday Details: Come explore Pittsburgh’s newest city park with the Park Rangers! The overlook hike will be the first in a series of Sunday afternoon hikes. We will be walking approximately 2 miles on intermediate difficulty single track trails throughout the gorgeous glens and meadows of Hays woods. Bring sturdy shoes and water. Dogs are welcome on leash. Registration is not required but recommended for updates and cancelations due to weather.

Location: Highland Park-Next to dog park (N 40.48351, W 79.91175) Details: Join your Rangers to cut down Japanese Knotweed behind the dog park. We will be clearing out the single-track trail to make it more accessible. Gloves and tools will be provided, dress appropriately (Toe-closed shoes and pants). No registration necessary!

6/8 Reservoir Hike Details: Rangers will lead you on a walk around the Reservoir, discussing the history and how it operates. Only 0.7 miles long on pavement, with one set of steps. Register below!

6/9: Monday Meetup Details: Join the Emerald View Park Rangers for a free activity at Emerald View Park’s playgrounds, perfect for all ages. Immerse yourself in nature and spark your creativity with our vibrant Coffee Filter Butterfly craft! No registration is required—just come by and join the fun. We look forward to seeing you there!

6/9 Wightman Park Days Location: Wightman Park (5612 Solway St. PGH PA 15217) Details: Join your Pittsburgh Park Rangers for a quick, free tabling activity at the Wightman Park playground! No registration required.

Details: Come join your Rangers to learn about animals commonly found in your city parks. Hands on learning with skins & skulls during presentation. Fun for all ages! Register on Eventbrite using the link below!

6/10: Tabling Tuesday Details: Come join your Frick Park Rangers and learn about make a test your knowledge with Frick Park Jeopardy! Tabling Tuesdays are free, educational activities for Frick Park’s playgrounds. No registration required!

6/12: Tabling Thursday 6/16: Monday Meetup Details: Join the Emerald View Park Rangers for a free activity at Emerald View Park’s playgrounds, perfect for all ages. Immerse yourself in nature and spark your creativity with our vibrant Coffee Filter Butterfly craft! No registration is required—just come by and join the fun. We look forward to seeing you there!

6/16: Small Park Series 6/16 Wightman Park Days Location: Wightman Park (5612 Solway St. PGH PA 15217) Details: Join your Pittsburgh Park Rangers for a quick, free tabling activity at the Wightman Park playground! No registration required.

6/17: Tabling Tuesday Details: Come join your Frick Park Rangers and learn about make Friendship Bracelets! Tabling Tuesdays are free, educational activities for Frick Park’s playgrounds. No registration required!

For the June Hikes, we will meet at the Blue Slide Playground entrance to Frick Park (use nearest residential address of: 2466 Beechwood Blvd.) at 5:00. Street parking is plentiful and/or park on English Lane (behind the playground). This hike will explore some of Frick Park’s single-track trails around this entrance to Frick Park. Participants should be comfortable walking on narrow trails and wear closed toe shoes and be prepared to cross muddy sections of trails. This hike will be about 2.2 miles long. This hike will have uneven terrain and participants should be prepared to descend down short segments and be comfortable taking larger steps down steep terrain.

Location: Greenleaf Trailhead - Greenleaf St. (1870 Greenleaf Street Pittsburgh, PA 15211) Details: Come join Ranger Marya for an exhilarating 2.3-mile guided hike through the scenic Emerald View Park. This hike features a gradual elevation gain and offers breathtaking views from one of the city's best overlooks. As we trek through a mix of narrow, rustic woodland trails and newly constructed pathways, your friendly Park Ranger will share interesting insights.

Please wear comfortable closed-toe shoes and bring water to stay hydrated. Keep in mind that there may not be restroom facilities available on this hike, so plan accordingly.

Details: Come explore Pittsburgh’s newest city park with the Park Rangers! The secluded woodlands, lush creek valleys, and open meadows of Hays woods host a vibrant array of wildlife found nowhere else in the city. We will be walking approximately 2 miles on intermediate difficulty single track trails throughout the park. Bring sturdy shoes and water. Dogs are welcome on leash. Registration is not required but recommended for updates and cancelations due to weather.

6/23: Monday Meetup Location: Mt. Washington Park Playground (Norton St, Pittsburgh, PA 15211) Details: Join the Emerald View Park Rangers for a free activity at Emerald View Park’s playgrounds, perfect for all ages. Immerse yourself in nature and spark your creativity with our vibrant Coffee Filter Butterfly craft! No registration is required—just come by and join the fun. We look forward to seeing you there!

6/23: Small Park Series 6/23 Wightman Park Days Location: Wightman Park (5612 Solway St. PGH PA 15217) Details: Join your Pittsburgh Park Rangers for a quick, free tabling activity at the Wightman Park playground! No registration required.

6/24: Tabling Tuesday Details: Come join your Frick Park Rangers and learn about try out our Snake Craft! Tabling Tuesdays are free, educational activities for Frick Park’s playgrounds. No registration required!

6/26: Tabling Thursday 6/28: Firefly Presentation Details: Come learn about fireflies during one of their most active times of the year with Pittsburgh Park Rangers! We will observe the fireflies in a nearby field, while Rangers share knowledge about them and their behavior. There will also be an educational activity involving flashlights. This is not a hike, but there will be a short amount of walking involved on sloped terrain. Please wear close-toed shoes and bring water bottles with you.

6/30: Small Park Series Location: Highland Park, Mt. Bigelow (nearest residential address 2003 Reservoir Drive) Details: Join your Pittsburgh Park Rangers for an age 50+ guided hike series featuring the City of Pittsburgh’s Regional Parks! This hike series will focus on shorter hikes (under 2 miles) for beginner hikers. All hikes will be a slow-to-light pace with a few stopping points throughout! Participants are urged to wear closed toe shoes, wear sunscreen, and pack a water bottle for this hike series. Registration is not required but recommended for updates and cancellations, due to inclement weather. Registration opens March 1st!

5/1: Tabling Thursday Details: Join your Frick Park Rangers for a conservation related service event in the park! This month we will be cutting invasive knotweed. Registration recommended but not required!

5/5: Monday Meetup Details: Join the Emerald View Park Rangers for a free activity at Emerald View Park’s playgrounds, perfect for all ages. Immerse yourself in nature and spark your creativity with our hands-on Make Your Own Binoculars activity! No registration is required—just come by and join the fun. We look forward to seeing you there!

5/6: Tabling Tuesday Details: Come join your Frick Park Rangers and learn about Bird Beak Adaptations! Tabling Tuesdays are free, educational activities for Frick Park’s playgrounds. No registration required!

Location: Frick Environmental Center (2005 Beechwood Blvd.) Details: Join Ranger Erica to learn the trails of Frick Park! Over the course of this hiking series participants will familiarize themselves with different walking loops under 2.5 miles in length. Participants are encouraged to wear closed toe shoes and pack their own water bottles. This hike series is open to all ages and friendly leashed dogs. Registration is recommended for updates and in event of weather cancellation.

For May hikes, we will meet at the Frick Environmental Center between the two gatehouses at the front entrance. Parking is available at the center along with bathrooms and water fountains. This hike will explore the Clayton Hill, North and South Clayton Trails and will be under 2 miles in distance. This hike will be predominately flat, however will have varied terrain including grass, mud, crushed stone, and asphalt.

5/8: Tabling Thursday 5/12: Monday Meetup Details: Join the Emerald View Park Rangers for a free activity at Emerald View Park’s playgrounds, perfect for all ages. Immerse yourself in nature and spark your creativity with our hands-on Make Your Own Binoculars activity! No registration is required—just come by and join the fun. We look forward to seeing you there!

5/12 Wightman Park Days Location: Wightman Park (5612 Solway St. PGH PA 15217) Details: Join your Pittsburgh Park Rangers for a quick, free tabling activity at the Wightman Park playground! No registration required.

5/13: Tabling Tuesday Details: Come join your Frick Park Rangers and play our Leave No Trace and Recycling Games! Tabling Tuesdays are free, educational activities for Frick Park’s playgrounds. No registration required!

5/15: Tabling Thursday Location: Riverview Park Visitor Center (1 Riverview Ave. Pittsburgh, PA 15214) Details: Join Riverview Park Rangers on a flower and plant identification hike! We will learn about the spring flowers we come across and talk about edible and medicinal qualities of the plants we see. We will NOT be harvesting plants on this hike. This event is an hour and a half long, with lots of stopping and talking. The trails may be rugged and muddy with elevation changes. Please wear proper footwear and dress for the weather.

5/17: Explore Emerald View Park – Mt. Washington Park Details: Come join Ranger Marya for a Guided Hike through Mt. Washington Park in Emerald View Park! This 1.64-mile hike, with a moderate elevation gain, is a fantastic way to explore the park's natural beauty. Your friendly Park Ranger will share interesting insights as we walk along narrow, rustic woodland trails.

There’s a portable toilet available at the meeting spot for your convenience. Be sure to wear comfortable closed-toe shoes and bring water to stay hydrated.

5/19: Monday Meetup Details: Join the Emerald View Park Rangers for a free activity at Emerald View Park’s playgrounds, perfect for all ages. Immerse yourself in nature and spark your creativity with our hands-on Make Your Own Binoculars activity! No registration is required—just come by and join the fun. We look forward to seeing you there!

5/19 Wightman Park Days Location: Wightman Park (5612 Solway St. PGH PA 15217) Details: Join your Pittsburgh Park Rangers for a quick, free tabling activity at the Wightman Park playground! No registration required.

5/20: Tabling Tuesday Details: Come join your Frick Park Rangers and Make your own Binocluars! Tabling Tuesdays are free, educational activities for Frick Park’s playgrounds. No registration required!

For May hikes, we will meet at the Frick Environmental Center between the two gatehouses at the front entrance. Parking is available at the center along with bathrooms and water fountains. During this hike we will start to explore the hollow area of Frick Park and how to connect it to the Environmental Center entrance. This hike will be 2 miles with a steep descent during the first half and an uphill walk for the second half. We will walk at a slow to easy pace with a few breaks along the way.

5/22: Tabling Thursday 5/22: Riverview Art in the Park Details: Art in the park is a great program for anyone who likes both art and nature! Rangers will provide the proper materials such as paint, brushes, canvasses, etc. All you have to do is register on the Eventbrite page and show up with your own creative ideas. This is an outdoor event where we will enjoy the beautiful views in front of the Allegheny Observatory.

*This is not a class, but an opportunity to make art in nature with provided materials 5/27: Tabling Tuesday Details: Come join your Frick Park Rangers and learn Knot Tying! Tabling Tuesdays are free, educational activities for Frick Park’s playgrounds. No registration required!

5/29: Tabling Thursday (40.48350 N, 79.91216 W) Details: Join your Rangers for a trash cleanup along Old Butler Street Trail. This cleanup will in the woods and on a slight incline; dress appropriately. No registration required!

5/31 Carnegie Lake Hike Details: Rangers will lead you around the Lake as we discuss the history and how it functions as an ecosystem. Only a mile hike! Mostly flat, but sometimes uneven terrain that includes stairs. Great for all ages! Closed toe shoes are recommended. Register below!

Details: Join your Pittsburgh Park Rangers for an age 50+ guided hike series featuring the City of Pittsburgh’s Regional Parks! This hike series will focus on shorter hikes (under 2 miles) for beginner hikers. All hikes will be a slow-to-light pace with few stopping points throughout! Participants are urged to wear closed toe shoes, wear sunscreen, and pack a water bottle for this hike series. Registration is not required but recommended for updates and cancellations due to inclement weather. Registration opens March 1st!

4/12: Easter Egg Hunt Details: We are kicking the year off with a litter pickup event behind the tennis courts. Let’s see how many old tennis balls we can collect! Please wear closed toe shoes; cleanup area is wooded. No registration required.

4/13 Memorial Grove Hike Details: Rangers will lead you through the brief history of the Entry Gardens, Memorial Grove, Mount Bigelow, and the Reservoir. Totaling 1.2 miles of mainly flat, easy terrain, but there will be a couple flights of steps and uneven terrain in spots. Closed toe shoes are recommended. Register below!

4/14 Wightman Park Days Location: Wightman Park (5612 Solway St. PGH PA 15217) Details: Join your Pittsburgh Park Rangers for a quick, free tabling activity at the Wightman Park playground! No registration required.

4/15: Tabling Tuesday Details: Come join your Frick Park Rangers and make a nature postcard! Tabling Tuesdays are free, educational activities for Frick Park’s playgrounds. No registration required!

4/17: Tabling Thursday 4/21: Monday Meetup Details: Join the Emerald View Park Rangers for a free activity at Emerald View Park’s playgrounds, perfect for all ages. Explore nature and enjoy hands-on experiences like crafting pinecone birdfeeders, creating nature weaving art, testing your skills with the Scat Match activity, or learning about flying insects in Sting or Not. No registration is required—just come by and join the fun. We look forward to seeing you there!

4/21 Wightman Park Days Location: Wightman Park (5612 Solway St. PGH PA 15217) Details: Join your Pittsburgh Park Rangers for a quick, free tabling activity at the Wightman Park playground! No registration required.

4/22: Tabling Tuesday Details: Come join your Frick Park Rangers and grow your own tree! Tabling Tuesdays are free, educational activities for Frick Park’s playgrounds. No registration required!

4/23: Tabling Wednesday Details: Come join your Schenley Park Rangers for a FREE activity. Fun for all ages! No registration required!

4/23: Wildlife Trivia Details: Join the Pittsburgh Park Rangers for an interactive trivia game to test your knowledge about Pittsburgh’s wildlife. Whether you're a nature enthusiast or just curious about what animals are doing in the woods, this engaging program is perfect for lifelong learners.

4/24: Tabling Thursday 4/25: Wildlife Trivia Details: Join the Pittsburgh Park Rangers for an interactive trivia game to test your knowledge about Pittsburgh’s wildlife. Whether you're a nature enthusiast or just curious about what animals are doing in the woods, this engaging program is perfect for lifelong learners.

Location: Allegheny Commons Parks (W. Ohio Street) Location: Anderson Playground Details: Trash pick up event with your Schenley Park Rangers. Give back to your community and come join us for a trash pick up at Schenley Park and help beautify your parks! Trash bags, litter grabbers and gloves will be provided. Please wear closed toed shoes.

Location: Mt. Washington Park (529 Norton St. Pittsburgh, PA 15211) Time: 1:00 PM- 2:30 PM Details: Join the Pittsburgh Park Rangers for a Bioblitz in Emerald View Park as part of the City Nature Challenge! This event is a hands-on way to explore local biodiversity while contributing to global citizen science efforts using the iNaturalist app on your smartphone. All ages! For detailed information, click the registration link.

4/28 Wightman Park Days Location: Wightman Park (5612 Solway St. PGH PA 15217) Details: Join your Pittsburgh Park Rangers for a quick, free tabling activity at the Wightman Park playground! No registration required.

4/28: Monday Meetup Location: Mt. Washington Playground (Norton St, Pittsburgh, PA 15211) Details: Join the Emerald View Park Rangers for a free activity at Emerald View Park’s playgrounds, perfect for all ages. Explore nature and enjoy hands-on experiences like crafting pinecone birdfeeders, creating nature weaving art, testing your skills with the Scat Match activity, or learning about flying insects in Sting or Not. No registration is required—just come by and join the fun. We look forward to seeing you there!

4/29: Tabling Tuesday Details: Come join your Frick Park Rangers and make thumbprint trees! Tabling Tuesdays are free, educational activities for Frick Park’s playgrounds. No registration required!

4/30: Tabling Wednesday Details: Come join your Schenley Park Rangers for a FREE activity. Fun for all ages! No registration required!

4/30: Nocturnal Creatures Details: Join the Pittsburgh Park Rangers for a fascinating and fun-filled presentation on the amazing world of nocturnal animals! Discover how creatures like owls, bats, and raccoons have adapted to life in the dark with extraordinary senses, stealthy movement, and unique behaviors.

Enjoy an interactive trivia game to test your knowledge about Pittsburgh’s nighttime wildlife. Whether you're a nature enthusiast or just curious about what happens in the park after dark, this engaging program is perfect for lifelong learners.

3/10: Nocturnal Creatures Details: Join the Pittsburgh Park Rangers for a fascinating and fun-filled presentation on the amazing world of nocturnal animals! Discover how creatures like owls, bats, and raccoons have adapted to life in the dark with extraordinary senses, stealthy movement, and unique behaviors.

3/11: Nocturnal Creatures Location: Mt. Washington Healthy Active Living Center (122 Virginia Ave, Pittsburgh, PA 15211) Details: Join the Pittsburgh Park Rangers for a fascinating and fun-filled presentation on the amazing world of nocturnal animals! Discover how creatures like owls, bats, and raccoons have adapted to life in the dark with extraordinary senses, stealthy movement, and unique behaviors.

3/14: Owl and full moon hike: Schenley Park Details: Would you like to learn more about owls in western PA, or full moons? Well, you are in luck! Join your Schenley Park Rangers for a full moon hike starting at the Schenley Park Visitor Center. We will also be keeping an eye out for the great horned owls living in the park! Please come dressed for the weather and bring a pair of binoculars. If you do not have a pair, we will provide you with one. This event is weather-dependent, we will update you if anything changes!

Details: Come join your Schenley Park Rangers for the first spring hike of 2025! We will explore the park, hiking upper and lower panther hollow panther trail. Please wear proper footwear as the trails may be muddy. The hike will be just under 2 miles long. We will be keeping an eye out for what is waking up in the park after a long winter!

Spring Hike sign up Location: Riverview Park Centennial Pavilion (394-784 Riverview Ave., Pittsburgh, PA, 15214) Details: Meet at the Riverview Park Visitor Center to grab some tools and get a quick lesson on how to remove some pesky invasive plants in the park. We will then hike to an area to remove the invasive species we come across. While it may be muddy, this is a great time of year to get off trail and tackle some of these plants before too much undergrowth fills in. Please be prepared for mud and brambles and dress appropriately, gloves will be provided. This is a wonderful opportunity to learn how to pitch in and help the ecosystems thrive in our parks!

Details: Join Pittsburgh Park Rangers on a one-hour hike using the light of the nearly full moon to guide our way. We encourage participants to keep lights to a minimum and enjoy the darkness and the moonlight. There will be stairs, some elevation changes, and some rugged trails, which we will take at a gradual pace, with 3 educational stops. Please dress appropriately for the weather and know that this event is very weather dependent and will be canceled even if it’s just too cloudy. We do this before the moon is actually full because it is better for viewing afterward at the Observatory. The second half-hour of this event will be spent touring the Observatory and viewing the moon through its telescopes! Registration required.

Click here to register Details: Join us at the Grandview Park Bandstand for a fun hour of birdwatching and counting as we participate in the Great Backyard Bird Count. This event is perfect for all ages and experience levels. Grab your binoculars and get ready to spot some feathered friends in their natural habitat. Let's count some birds together and contribute to citizen science. Don't miss out on this exciting event! Dress for the weather and expect to hike slowly for close to 1 hour.

Click here to register or call 412-977-9442 Details: Join Park Rangers and local birders for the annual Great Backyard Bird Count! The Great Backyard Bird Count is a global community science event that began in 1998 where participants count and document the birds they see in their communities. These observations help scientists better understand global bird populations before one of their annual migrations. No experience is necessary, and you will be guided by experts! Beginners welcome, and there will be hot cocoa and a limited number of binoculars provided at the Visitor Center.

Click here to register Pittsburgh Park Rangers work year-round as liaisons between the public and the City of Pittsburgh to advocate and promote City Parks. Park Rangers are responsible for park related ordinance enforcement, educational programming and oversight of all Pittsburgh City Parks. Through daily patrols, continual safety education, and emergency response assistance they ensure safety for all park patrons.

Pittsburgh Park Rangers have jurisdiction over all Pittsburgh Parks and are actively present in all five regional parks including Emerald View, Frick, Highland, Riverview, and Schenley Parks. Rangers are also present in smaller parks including Allegheny Commons, Market Square, Mellon Park, and Westinghouse Park amongst others.

Rules and Regulations Park Rangers are authorized to enforce and issue citations for any violation to park ordinances which can be found under the municipal code section 473 and 633. These rules include but are not limited to: Park hours are 6AM-11PM unless otherwise noted.

All pets must remain on a leash throughout the park unless in an approved off-leash exercise area (OLEA) site.

Any disfigurement or removal of park amenities is prohibited. This includes natural resources such as lumber, plants, and/or seeds.

All forms of tobacco are prohibited within City Parks. This includes but is not limited to cigarettes, cigars, vapes, e-cigarettes, and chewing tobacco.

Interfering with any wildlife is prohibited, this includes hunting, trapping, feeding, and/or harvesting.

Proper permits are required for any pavilion rental or special event happening within parks.

Grilling is only permitted in designated grilling areas. Campfires are prohibited without a permit.

Additional Questions? Check out the municipal code of ordinances The Pittsburgh Park Rangers organize numerous educational activities both in parks and classroom settings. Activities include nature related tabling activities, star parties and guided hikes! If you are interested in setting up a Park Ranger sponsored program feel free to send us an e-mail!

and exchange it for a badge at any Park Ranger event throughout the year.

. This packet is full of free activities for kids and families including coloring, puzzles, nature pages, and even a Build-Your-Own Park activity!

Get in Touch!

Have a question or concern regarding your local park? Or want to set up a program? Send us an email. Include which park you are interested in and a ranger will get back to you!

@pghparkrangers on Facebook @pghparkrangers on Instagram to keep up-to-date on everything happening in Pittsburgh's Parks!

Iron gate and fence Large mushroom cluster grown on side of a tree Two Park Rangers walking a park path Snowy day in Schenley Park Children crafting in classroom Child studying tree leaf last updated: 09/24/2025 Back to top