Update September 2025 Follow this page and receive updates as they become available by clicking the "follow" button above!

Use the form below if you are interested in having your sidewalk, walkway, and/or driveway shoveled by a community Snow Angel.

We do our best to pair all applicants with a volunteer snow angel, but we cannot guarantee this outcome. Our team is always accepting new volunteers which means you may be paired with somebody later in the season.

Applications coming Fall 2025!

Use the form below if you are interested in volunteering to be a Snow Angel.

Helping our neighbors is SNOW much fun.

Along with fostering stronger community relationships and relieving some of the stress that comes from a heavy snowfall or freeze, Snow Angels make our sidewalks safer for those who are outside during winter weather like postal workers, firefighters, police officers, and other neighbors.

In 2023, we encouraged coaches, faith-based organizations, and community leaders to sign up as Snow Angels to support neighbors in need.

If you’d like a neighbor to come help break the ice.

Requirements to request a volunteer Snow Angel: Be at least 62 years old, or have a physical disability Live within the City limits.

to find out if your address is in this boundary Things to know before signing up: Applicants are not guaranteed assistance.

Service depends on if there’s a Snow Angel who has signed up to volunteer near you. Our staff works closely with the community to do the best volunteer recruitment and outreach we can, but we cannot guarantee you will be matched.

If you are matched with a volunteer, we will notify you by email or phone call.

You may not receive immediate help during a snowfall.

Please give your volunteer a reasonable amount of time to assist you. We typically recommend allowing 24-hours after a snow event to allow your Snow Angel to arrive as your Snow Angel may have work, family, or personal matters that prevent them from immediately addressing your sidewalk or walkway.