In This Section Love Your Block Black Pittsburgh Matters Pittsburgh's Women's Suffrage Centennial Immigrant and Refugee Affairs Black Pittsburgh Matters Black Pittsburgh Matters is the City’s platform to transform black communities and improve Black people’s quality of life. Black Pittsburgh Matters Principles are as follows: Black Lives Matter: Protecting the health and safety of Black People Black Communities Matter: Rebuilding traditional Black communities Black Wealth Matters: Increasing Black employment and entrepreneurship.

Your browser does not support inline frames.

Black Pittsburgh Matters Policies and Programs include the following.

Legislation focused on eliminating student opportunity gaps.

Startup to Storefront assists start-up minority and women businesses succeed.

Expands affordable housing and builds capacity for local non-profits and community development corporations.

Invest PGH aids small business and affordable housing initiatives throughout Pittsburgh.

The Land Bank returns unproductive vacant and blighted Real Estate Property to beneficial reuse.

Wage Review Committee The Wage Review Committees recommendations improves the wages and working conditions of Pittsburgh Service Workers.

Learn & Earn provides meaningful work experiences and career exposure to low-income youth and young adults ages 14-24, residing in the City of Pittsburgh.

Housing Opportunity Fund Housing Opportunity Fund A designated fund increasing affordable housing in the City.

A three-pronged approach: Better Training, Better Technology and Better Transparency for improvement.

The City is creating additional high quality affordable housing.

The Plan and Fund achieve excellence and equity in every park and in every neighborhood in Pittsburgh.

Innovative Police reforms and initiatives have to create greater community and policy partnership programs.

Legislation declaring racism a Public Health crisis in the City Pittsburgh and a commitment to provide concrete solutions.

A Commission charged with making recommendations to increase racial equity.

The has committed to the Ten principles of racial Equity to increase equity, diversity and inclusion.

Strategic Investment Principles 5 Investment Principles designed to increase funding to black people, black organizations and black businesses in Black Communities.

A Holistic Model for Rebuilding Pittsburgh's Black & Disinvested Main Streets.

last updated: 04/04/2025 Back to top