JUNE 14: CommUnity Concert & Family BBQ bring their high energy and style to the stage for this Juneteenth weekend celebration featuring cookout foods by Community Kitchen Pittsburgh providing the first 100 meals for free. Additional food vendors on site along with a 3pt shoot out contest, backyard games and line dancing!

Ticket holders, hold onto your tickets to receive entry on Sunday!

Sunday, JUNE 22 Free, registration required - More info about the Roller Rink can also be found here Dusk, unless otherwise noted Dollar Bank Cinema in the Park invites you to bring a blanket or lawn chair to enjoy your favorite park location’s showing a special feature film of “Soul” (PG) or “Fences” (PG-13).

Schenley Plaza - “Soul” Banksville Park - “Soul” Flagstaff Hill - “Fences” Arsenal Park - “Soul” Grandview Park - “Soul” page for more movie details.

AM, Art Cart AM-1:00 PM Me and Uncle Romie - A story inspired by the life and art of Romare Bearden. Romare moved to Pittsburgh from New York City with his grandparents and learned to draw from a neighbor and later went on to college. Romare's art often depicted Pittsburgh neighborhoods. Romare Bearden is a featured artist in the the Roving Art Cart's "Meet the Masters" series. Romare created "Pittsburgh Recollections" for the original Gateway T-Station in Pittsburgh. Children attending can create a neighborhood collage.

JUNE 28: WAMO DAY in partnership with the City of Pittsburgh WAMO 107.3 made history in Pittsburgh, to be the first organized celebration and remembrance of Juneteenth in Pittsburgh, called WAMO DAY. WAMO has partnered with the City of Pittsburgh on many special events and it is an honor to collaborate on this Juneteenth's culminating showcase of black talent and culture in Pittsburgh.

Special activities, and performances will be offered throughout the afternoon including: Cue Perry's Live Collaborative Painting, Beanie Paints Face Painting, Reading is Fundamental's Storymobile, and 360 Photo Booth.

This event is committed to creating a safe, comfortable, and enjoyable experience. Intervention with any impaired or intoxicated guests will be handled in a prompt and safe manner. Prohibited items include but are not limited to: Pop Up Tents Mace / Pepper Spray Weapons of Any Kind & any other items determined to be potential safety hazards WAMO 107.3, Dollar Bank, RAD last updated: 06/18/2025 Back to top