In This Section Boards, Authorities, Commissions Finance & Budget Management & Budget New Business Registration Property Tax Worksheet Real Estate Taxes Waiver and Refund Request Who Pays the Tax?

This tax is collected by the provider of the amusement from patrons. The tax due is 5% of the admission fee charged for attending any amusement in the City of Pittsburgh. An amusement can include any form of entertainment such as concerts, movies, night clubs, conventions, or sporting events.

If you operate or provide any place of amusement where people must pay an established price to attend or engage in the amusement, then you are responsible for collecting the tax from patrons, filing the tax returns, and remitting the tax to the City of Pittsburgh.

You must file monthly reports with the City Treasurer on or before the 15th day of the following month, reporting the preceding month’s activity on the Amusement Tax form If the place of amusement is temporary, you must file reports after each performance.

How much is it?

Amusement Tax is imposed at the rate of 5% of the gross admission charge for the amusement venue or event. No deductions are allowed for any costs or expenses that you incur in providing the amusement.

For an amusement (entertainment) at a place where food and drink are served where there is no fixed charge for admission, the Amusement Tax will be based on 10% of the total amount paid for food and drink. For example, if a check for food and drink by a party of four amounts to $80.00, the admission charge is 10% of the total check, or $8.00. $8.00 admission charge X 5% = $ .40 Amusement Tax.

Where admission is obtained to any amusement solely or partly by a donation, contribution and other monetary charge, the established price for amusement for purposes of the tax shall be twenty-five (25%) percent of the total donation, contribution and other monetary charge.

When amusement is conducted at a social club or fraternal organization which also furnishes entertainment for which a separate charge is not made, the established price shall be fifty (50%) percent of the gross receipts For more information, see: Amusement Tax Regulations Amusement Tax FAQs What happens if you don’t pay on time?

If you don’t pay on time, interest and penalties will be added to the amount you owe.

In order for a mailed report and return to be considered timely, it must be postmarked by the United States Post Office by the due date. The City Treasurer will allow for a two-day grace period for those reports and returns privately postmarked.

In order for an electronically submitted report and return to be considered timely, it must be submitted by 11:59PM Eastern Time on the due date.

Discounts and Exemptions Are you eligible for a discount?

No discounts are available for the Amusement Tax.

Can you be excused from collecting the Amusement tax and paying the tax to the City?

Private affairs sponsored by nonprofit organizations for members and their guests at which the admission charges or contribution approximate the expenses and the net proceeds benefit the nonprofit organization are considered “Exempt Amusements”. However, if members of the general public are invited to the private affair, the event is not an Exempt Amusement.

Additionally, children under twelve (12) years of age, disabled veterans and members of the armed services when on active duty and in uniform, who are admitted free of charge to any place of amusement, shall not be required to pay the Amusement Tax.

Additional exemptions are listed in the Amusement Tax Regulations How to Pay Make check payable to: “Treasurer, City of Pittsburgh.” Do not send cash.

Mail to: Treasurer, City of Pittsburgh – 414 Grant St. Pittsburgh, PA 15219-2476 A $30.00 fee will be assessed for any check returned from the bank for any reason.

Visit the first floor payment windows of the City Treasurer’s Office in the City-County Building at 414 Grant St, Pittsburgh PA.

A check or cash are acceptable for in-person payments.

The relevant ordinance is Forms and Instructions Amusement Tax Form , as well as instructions that apply to this and other tax types.

Every producer of an amusement must secure an Amusement Tax Permit from the Office of Permits, Licenses and Inspections at 412-255-2558 (prior to the event).

For additional information call 412-255-2525 Tax First Levied: 1947 What is Taxed?

Under Pennsylvania Earned Income Tax law, all residents of the City of Pittsburgh must have three (3%) percent of their wages withheld from their pay as Earned Income Tax. This amount is to be remitted to Jordan Tax Services. This applies whether the employer is located within or outside the City of Pittsburgh. The determining factor is the residency of the employee, not the location of the employer.

If insufficient amounts are withheld by employers, City residents are required to pay the difference when EIT tax returns are filed with Jordan Tax Services. Jordan Tax Services is the agent for EIT Tax collection for the Allegheny County Central Tax District.

City of Pittsburgh residential; City 1%, School district 2%.

The earned income tax (EIT) is commonly referred to as the wage tax. Although wages are the most common source of income taxed, wages are not the only source taxed. This tax is collected by Jordan Tax Services.

Who is Taxed?

The tax is applied to people who earn income and/or profits and are CIty and School District residents. Residents pay 1% city tax and 2% school tax for a total of 3%. Non-Pennsylvania residents who work within the City pay 1%. Mt. Oliver Borough residents pay the School Earned Income Tax of 2% to the city which acts as the tax collector for the School District. Mt. Oliver residents must also file directly with the Mt. Oliver Borough tax office to report the borough Earned Income Tax.

What is Taxed?

Wages, salaries, tips compensation that is earned, bonuses, stock options, covenant not to compete, other incentives, net profit from businesses or professions. The definition of compensation that applies for the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania is identical for the City.

Interest, dividends, active duty pay from the armed forces, pensions, social security, and capital gains.

All expenses that are allowed on the State of Pennsylvania UE form.

Up to 1% of income taxes paid to a municipality in another state or to another state and not claimed on the EIT. This credit applies to the city tax only.

Self-employed individuals make quarterly payments using forms from Jordan Tax Services. These forms can be found on the Jordan Tax website Due dates are: 1st quarter due April 30 2nd quarter due July 31 3rd quarter due Oct 31 4th quarter due Jan 31 If a person is employed for wages and has the EIT withheld by his/her employer, but also has self-employment income, estimates must be filed for the self-employment income.

Information on filing EIT Forms 15th of April, for prior activity.

Who Pays the Tax?

Generally, all revenue from services performed within the City limits are subject to tax. Individual charges for services rendered to a member or nonmember are subject to tax. Membership fees and charitable contributions are not subject to tax.

All gross receipts of an Institution of Purely Public Charity, which has a non-profit sales tax exemption issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue, are not subject to tax.

You must file the and payment with the City Treasurer on or before the 15th day of April, reporting the preceding year’s activity on the form provided.

New businesses must file the return with the City Treasurer within forty (40) days of starting the service with the institution’s name, the services rendered, the institution address, and such other information as may be necessary in arriving at the actual volume of services transacted by it during the first month of service and amount of tax due.

Every person or institution who engages in a temporary/seasonal service shall, within seven (7) days from the day it completes such service, file a return with the City Treasurer with the institution’s name, service, the person or institution address, and such other information as may be necessary in arriving at the actual gross volume of service, during the tax period and the amount of tax due.

The tax rate is six (6) mills on each dollar of annual gross receipts. (Six mills equals $6.00 per $1,000 or 6/10 of 1%). Exempt receipts are not taxed. A reduced tax rate of two mills (2/10 of 1%) applies to proprietors of locations where food and beverages are sold.

For more information, see: What happens if you don’t pay on time?

No discounts are available for the Institution and Service Privilege Tax.

Can you be excused from paying the tax to the City?

If you are an “Exempt Institution” under the Institution and Service Privilege Tax Regulations, you are exempt from paying the tax. Examples of Exempt Institutions include: an Institution of Purely Public Charity, any government entity, or any utility company. To prove to the City that you are an Institution of Purely Public Charity, you must have a sales tax exemption as a non-profit issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue and show your exemption number on the tax return. Affiliates of Institutions of Purely Public Charity which do not have their own sales tax exemption are not exempt.

How to Pay Make check payable to: “Treasurer, City of Pittsburgh.” Write your city account number on your check Do not send cash Mail to: City Treasurer ISP Tax, 414 Grant St. STE 224, Pittsburgh, PA 15219-2476 A $30.00 fee will be assessed for any check returned from the bank for any reason.

The relevant ordinance is Forms and Instructions , as well as instructions that apply to this and other tax types.

Additional information call 412-255-2525 Local Services Tax 30 days after quarter end for the prior quarters' activity.

$52/year, paid in even parts over 4 quarters.

Who Collects the Tax?

Employers are required to withhold the tax from the earnings of their employees and pay over the tax to the City Treasurer. For purposes of this tax, sole proprietors and partners shall be deemed to be employees. The Local Services Tax of $52 is to be deducted evenly from pay checks throughout the year.

If the employer does not withhold the proper amount of tax, then the employee, partner, or self-employed person must pay the Local Services Tax directly to the City Treasurer.

Employers must file quarterly reports with the City Treasurer on or before the 30th day after the quarter, reporting the preceding quarter’s activity on the How much is it?

The Local Services Tax is $52/year, collected quarterly.

For more information, see: Local Services Tax FAQs What happens if you don’t pay on time?

No discounts are available for the Local Services Tax. However, an employee whose total income for a calendar year was less than $12,000, can apply for a refund of $52 (or the amount withheld) the following year using the Local Services Refund form at the “ Can you be excused from collecting the tax and paying the tax to the City?

Yes. Employers must discontinue withholding the Local Services Tax when (i) the total earned income from all sources within the City of Pittsburgh is less than $12,000; (ii) the employee is on active duty in the military; or (iii) the employee is an honorably discharged veteran of the armed forces with a 100% service-connected-disability. In order to receive an exemption from the Local Services Tax, the employee must file an exemption certificate with their employer which can be found at the “ What happens if the employee changes job locations during the year or works outside the City?

The employer is supposed to withhold the Local Services Tax for the municipality associated with the principal work location of the employee. For example, if the employee has $10 in Local Services Tax withheld for Municipality “A” and changes her job location to the City in the same calendar year, then the employee must provide the employer an exemption certificate. Having received the timely filed exemption certificate, the employer only has to withhold $42 ($52 less $10 paid to Municipality “A”) in City Local Services Tax from the employee.

What happens if the employee changes his employer during the year?

The employee is supposed to provide the employer an exemption certificate showing how much Local Services Tax has been withheld during the current year. No more than $52 in Local Services Tax can be withheld by all employers from a particular employee.

How to Pay Make check payable to: “Treasurer, City of Pittsburgh.” Do not send cash.

Mail to: City Treasurer LS-1 Tax, 414 Grant St., Pittsburgh, PA 15219-2476 A $30.00 fee will be assessed for any check returned from the bank for any reason.

Every employer not registered with the City of Pittsburgh shall, within 15 days after first becoming an employer, register with the City the employer’s name, address and such other information as the City may require.

For additional information call 412-255-2525 Every employer who employs one or more non-resident employees who earn compensation as the result of services performed at a publicly funded facility within the city. In the event the employer fails, refuses, or neglects to withhold or remit the fee for any portion thereof, the employee shall be personally liable for payment of the fee and any applicable penalty.

What the Fee is Based on Earned income. Fee rate is 3%.

Players or employees of a sports team and entertainers who engages in an athletic event at a publicly funded facility in Pittsburgh. For exact, separate determinations of how this fee is calculated for athletes, team employees, and entertainers, see the Residents of Pittsburgh Quarterly filings are due by the last day of the month following the close of the quarter.

As part of current and continued litigation concerning the Non-Resident Sports Facility Usage Fee, the City of Pittsburgh has conceded that the fee is indeed treated as a tax based on income. Pending the outcome of the litigation, changes may be forthcoming to the rules and regulations governing the filing, collection, and distribution or credit of the fee. Please note that at this point, no changes have been made and the tax still must be paid. Updates will be provided to this website when immediately available.

For previous statements and instructions related to the ongoing litigation, see the below PDFs with FAQs and updates: For additional information or tax forms, call: 412-255-2742 (David Rebholz).

Parks Trust Fund 901. Establishment of the City of Pittsburgh Parks Trust Fund The City of Pittsburgh hereby establishes a Parks Trust Fund dedicated to the following values: improvement, maintenance, creation and operation of public parks; improving park safety; providing equitable funding for parks, including those in underserved neighborhoods throughout the City of Pittsburgh; and securing matching funds and services from a charitable city parks conservancy.

The Parks Trust Fund shall be funded, in part, by adding 0.50 mills to the real estate tax rate that must be approved and set by the Council of the City of Pittsburgh each fiscal year. The Parks Trust Fund may also receive monies and contributions from additional sources, including existing trust funds dedicated to park uses, other funds as determined by the Council of the City of Pittsburgh, private charitable donations, and matching funds from charitable city parks conservancies as further provided in Section 903, in addition to other public and private sources.

903. Agreement With Charitable City Parks Conservancies 904. Audit of Parks Trust Fund 15th of each month, for the prior month’s activity.

This tax is collected by the operator of the parking lot from patrons. The tax due is 37.5% or 0.27273 of the gross parking fee charged.

If you operate a parking place or receive consideration for the parking or storage of vehicles at such parking place, then you are responsible for collecting the tax from patrons, filing the tax returns, and remitting the tax to the City of Pittsburgh.

You must file monthly reports with the City Treasurer on or before the 15th day of the following month, reporting the preceding month’s activity on the Parking Tax form . Tax returns must be filed even if no tax is due.

Parking Tax is imposed at the rate of 37.5% or 0.27273 of the gross parking fee charged. No deductions are allowed for any costs or expenses that you incur in providing the parking places.

For more information, see: Parking Tax Regulations Parking Tax FAQs What happens if you don’t pay on time?

If you don’t pay on time, interest and penalties will be added to the amount you owe. Additionally, if you as the operator, fail to collect the tax from patrons, then you shall be liable for paying the tax.

No discounts are available for the Parking Tax.

Can you be excused from collecting the tax and paying the tax to the City?

Parking Tax Regulations , then you are not liable for the Parking Tax but may be subject other business taxes.

Mail to: Parking Tax, 414 Grant St., Pittsburgh, PA,15219-2476 A $30.00 fee will be assessed for any check returned from the bank for any reason.

The relevant ordinance is Forms and Instructions Parking Tax Form , as well as instructions that apply to this and other tax types.

Every Operator must secure a license from the Superintendent of the Bureau of Building Inspection. Any provider of Valet Parking Services is required to hold a Valet parking license from the Director of Mobility and Infrastructure. Each license must be renewed annually.

For additional information call 412-255-2525.

Tax First Levied: 1962 Payroll Expense Tax The last day of the second month after quarter end for the prior quarters’ activity.

5½ Mills (.0055) or .55% Who Pays the Tax?

All persons who engage, hire, employ, or contract with one or more individuals, as employees, to perform work or render services within the City of Pittsburgh. The Payroll Tax is computed on the employer’s total payroll expense (total compensation) associated with business activity in the City. Partners are considered employees of the employer for purposes of the Payroll Tax. You do not need to be located in the City of Pittsburgh to be subject to this tax.

Yes, self-employed persons and partners in a partnership, if the partnership otherwise does not remit the tax, must file the tax return and remit the tax on their own earnings. In calculating the earnings of self-employed persons or partners, such earnings are the sum of guaranteed payments and the lesser of net profits or net draws or distributions from the business. Passive income received by a self-employed person or a partner is not subject to tax because it is not considered “earned” income.

Employers must file quarterly reports with the City Treasurer on or before the last day of the second month after the quarter, reporting the preceding quarter’s activity on the . Thus, 1st Quarter taxes and reports are due May 31st, 2nd Quarter; taxes and reports are due August 31st, 3rd Quarter taxes and reports are due November 30th, and 4th Quarter taxes and reports are due February 28th of the following year.

The Payroll Tax is fifty-five hundredths of a percent (.55% or .0055) of payroll expense generated as a result of an employer conducting business within the City of Pittsburgh, collected quarterly.

What is taxed?

Payroll expense, which is the total compensation paid, including salaries, wages, net distributions, commissions, bonuses, stock options and other compensation to all individuals who during any tax year, perform work or render services in whole or in part in the City of Pittsburgh.

For more information, see: Payroll Expense Tax FAQs What if my employees don’t just work in the City of Pittsburgh?

For employers whose employees perform work or render services partly within and partly outside of the City of Pittsburgh, the method of computing their payroll expense attributable to the City of Pittsburgh is to use the percentage of total number of working hours employed within the City of Pittsburgh compared to the total number of hours employed (within and outside) the City for each individual employee. Detailed examples are provided in the Regulations.

What happens if you don’t pay on time?

If an employer does not pay on time, interest and penalties will be added to the amount it owes.

Discounts and Special Rules Are you eligible for a discount?

No discounts are available for the Payroll Tax.

Do special rules apply to non-profit charities?

Yes. A charitable organization, shall calculate the tax that would otherwise be attributable to the City of Pittsburgh and file a return, but shall only pay the tax on that portion of its payroll expense attributable to business activity for which a tax may be imposed pursuant to unrelated business income tax (“UBIT”) under Section 511 of the Internal Revenue Code. Please review your IRS Form 990-T to determine which part of your activities are subject to the UBIT. If the charity has purchased or is operating branches, affiliates, subsidiaries or other business entities that do not independently meet the standards of the “Institutions of Purely Public Charity Act”, the tax shall be paid on the payroll attributable to such for-profit branches, affiliates or subsidiaries, whether or not the employees are leased or placed under the auspices of the charity’s umbrella or parent organization.

Mail to: Payroll Expense Tax, 414 Grant St., Pittsburgh, PA 15219-2476 A $30.00 fee will be assessed for any check returned from the bank for any reason.

The relevant ordinance is Forms and Instructions Payroll Tax Form , as well as instructions that apply to this and other tax types.

Payroll Tax Regulations can be found online.

Pittsburgh Code Reference: Ch. 258 For new business registration call 412-255-2525.

Real Estate Tax Who is Taxed All owners of real estate located within the City and School District. The market value of the property is determined by the Allegheny County Office of Property Assessment. The taxes are calculated by applying the millage rate to the assessed value.

Taxpayers may take a 2% discount on either of the following if taxes are paid by February 10th: The total annual tax due or, The first installment of tax due.

Last day of February for 1st installment or the annual amount at gross April 30th for 2nd installment July 31st for 3rd installment If no payment is made by the last day of February or if less than the entire first installment amount is paid by the last day of February, the entire year’s taxes become due and payable in full and incur interest charges from March 1st.

Tax bills are mailed in January. Further installment bills are mailed in April and July.

If you have any questions please call 412-255-2525.

First Levied: 1816 Who is Taxed?

Every person (natural, association, and corporation) that makes, executes, delivers, accepts, or presents for recording a document which represents the transfer of property.

The transfer tax is a tax upon the transaction involving the transfer of title to real estate. The transfer tax is imposed on all transactions that result in a transfer, for consideration, of a beneficial interest in real estate that is located within the city of Pittsburgh and/or School District of Pittsburgh limits.

Transfer to certain relatives, transfer between gov’t and instrumentalities, transfer to trustees for benefit of children, correctional deeds without consideration.

Real Estate agents or brokers can claim a deed transfer tax credit when the property was taken in trade for another property, but not in excess of the tax due.

In Oct. 2005, the City and School District adopted the provisions of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax (72 PS/8101-C et seq.) In addition the Commonwealth is authorized to act on behalf of the City and School District to enforce the collection of this tax. This tax is collected by realty transfer stamps that are issued by the Allegheny County Real Estate department, Recorder of Deeds (412-350-4226). The tax collected is then remitted to the City Treasurer. Pittsburgh Code Chapters 255 & 256 last updated: 08/18/2025 Back to top