In This Section Boards, Authorities, Commissions Finance & Budget Management & Budget New Business Registration Finance Permits & Licenses Prior Year Delinquent Tax bills are in the mail as of with a due date of . You can use this link to pay online, ; even before your bill arrives, or you also have the opportunity to scan our QR code to pay online.

To request a payment plan, please fill out and submit the Payment Plan application ( Link to Form . Paper applications and applications sent via email will no longer be accepted. A $25 application fee per property will apply.

The Real Estate Division of the Department of Finance accepts questions from the general public for purchase of properties.

The City makes certain that the requested property is not needed for public improvement. The prospective purchaser submits a request to become a qualified buyer.

A qualified buyer is one who: has paid taxes, water, sewage, etc.

is in compliance with City codes and policies.

The approved prospective purchaser is notified of the price in the response letter to the Request to Purchase form.

10/18/2025 - From 12pm - 3pm *Feel free to bring your contractor or inspector with you Please Download the application here: 3408 Clearfield St Flyer 454 Norton St Flyer 195 Steuben St Flyer 2921 Merwyn Ave Flyer 1310 Pritchard St Flyer Properties for Sale Learn more about our "Court Auction" property process Effective 10-31-2024, Legislation 2024-0776, Enactment # 763, the City's Side Yard Sale Program has been suspended indefinitely. Any Side Yard Sales in progress or have an offer letter sent prior to 10-31-2024 will be honored. If you have received a Side Yard Program Offer Letter, you must sign your proposal by 12-06-2024.

No. You do not have to be a resident of the City of Pittsburg to be eligible to purchase city-owned property.

No. It is not a requirement of the Request to Purchase form that you own property in the city or even at all. Renters can purchase property as long as they are approved.

No. There can only be one piece of property requested per form. If you are requesting multiple properties, each piece will require a new, separate, Request to Purchase form.

Why do the prices online all say “TBD?” Pricing of all properties will be done after you are approved as a buyer.

Those properties are owned by the City of Pittsburgh but are currently not available for sale. If that designation changes, the property will be uploaded to the eProperty Plus website and will be shown as available.

What type of correspondence will I get from the City regarding the price and sale?

You will receive a letter to your given address regarding your approval and the outcome and sale price of the property. That letter will have information and the directions to the next step of the sales process.

How much money will I need to start my sale?

You will be required to place 10% of the total purchase price or $200 (whichever is greater) down in hand money to officially start your sale with the city.

If my request to purchase gets denied do I have to start the sales process all over again?

No. You will have the opportunity to fix and resubmit the Request to Purchase form without having to start from the beginning.

No. You will be able to set a date and time to view the property once you have been approved and received a correspondence letter from the City.

Yes. The title and property will be free and clear of all back taxes and liens when you close on the property.

What happens if City Council does not approve the sale of the property?

If City Council does not approve the sale of your property, the 10% (or $200) hand money that you placed to start your sale will be returned to you in full.

last updated: 10/03/2025 Back to top