In This Section Animal Care & Control For Pet Owners Rodent Baiting Program Living with Wildlife Animal Control FAQs Emergency Medical Services Animal Care & Control The Bureau of Animal Care & Control serves the residents of the City of Pittsburgh by providing care, control and resolution to situations dealing with domestic animals and wildlife.

Description of Services The Bureau of Animal Care & Control provides assistance to Bureaus within the Department of Public Safety, other City Departments and the Allegheny County Health Department in situations involving animals, both domestic and wild. The Bureau enforces City and State codes dealing with animals; issues citations and appears in court; helps to keep our City’s parks animal-nuisance free; works with non-profit animal shelters; provides consultation to other municipalities concerning animal issues; and assists the Pennsylvania Game Commission in tracking the rabies virus.

Animal Care & Control Officers capture stray animals, assist in pet/owner recovery, resolve neighbor disputes over animals, assist the elderly and physically-challenged with animal concerns, advise and teach residents of their responsibility as pet owners, advise non-pet owners of their rights, and assist in the removal of nuisance wildlife. Nuisance wildlife is defined as wildlife that causes, or is about to cause, property damage or that presents a threat to the health or safety of the community by means of disease transmission or direct attacks. The Bureau also quarantines animals, provides removal of deceased animals, and assists police and the District Attorney's office with humane investigations.

Due to the wooded mountainous geography of our City, residents share common areas with a host of wildlife (skunks, raccoons, ground hogs, foxes, coyotes, deer, turkeys, etc.) Learn more about how to share space with wildlife by visiting our Living with Wild Life page The City offers 24 hour service. The Animal Care & Control office hours are Monday through Friday, 7 a.m. to 3 p.m. Please visit our Operations continue from 3 p.m. to 11 p.m. Monday through Friday. Saturdays and Sundays operations are from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m, and on holidays, from 8 am to 4 pm. All "after hour" operations are for any emergency that a resident may have. Call the after-hours number at 412-255-2935.

Responsible pet owners need to know that along with the obligation to properly feed, shelter, and care for a pet, there are laws (ordinances) to protect the animal, the pet owner, and the community.

"Owner" includes every person who keeps or shelters and every person who allows an animal to be on their property (land or house) which is occupied by him or her. This means that if you are in possession of an animal, whether you own it or not - you're responsible for its care, behavior, and welfare.

The City offers 24 hour service. The Animal Care & Control office hours are Monday through Friday, 7 a.m. to 3 p.m. Please visit our Operations continue from 3 p.m. to 11 p.m. Monday through Friday. Saturdays and Sundays operations are from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m, and on holidays, from 8 am to 4 pm. All "after hour" operations are for any emergency that a resident may have. Call the after-hours number at 412-255-2935.

For Pet Owners A license is required for every dog, age three-months and older, living in the City of Pittsburgh. Dog licenses and registration tags help to assist in finding lost pets.

The City of Pittsburgh Spay & Neuter program for community cats will resume accepting applications for up to five cats per household as a temporary extension of the 2023 contract.

Rodent Baiting Program The City of Pittsburgh has its own Rodent Baiting Program that residents can utilize for free up to two times per year.

Find information regarding the regulations and permits involved in keeping bees or farm animals in the city.

Living with Wildlife Having issues with wildlife? We have effective, inexpensive, and humane solutions.

Animal Control FAQs Find answers to Animal Control frequently asked questions.

last updated: 09/12/2025 Back to top