In This Section Film & Event Management Special Events Committee Public Event Calendar Special Events Committee Once a Reservation of Space application is received and logged, it moves on to the vetting process via the Special Events Committee. The Special Events Committee is a group of representatives from various City departments, including but not limited to Public Safety, Public Works, Parks & Recreation, Emergency Management, and Pittsburgh Regional Transit. This group meets every Tuesday morning to discuss the applications received the previous week, and to continue discussion on any applications that have been held over from the previous week. Once the Reservation of Space application is approved and an applicant has received, completed, and submitted their Phase Two Special Event application, the members of the SEC will review the Phase Two application in the same manner, leading to a full approval of an application.

The job of this committee is to review each application and determine if the proposed event is viable, make sure the dates and locations requested are available, ensure that proper procedure is being followed, and that any needed City resources are properly allocated and not over-booked.

If necessary, the committee may request that an organizer attend a committee meeting to further discuss their proposed event, and to work one-on-one with department representatives to iron out any needs from the respective departments.

The members of the Special Events Committee are as follows.

Public Safety Director Dept. of Public Safety Dept. of Public Safety Dept. of Public Safety Dept. of Public Safety Superintendent Streets Operations Dept. of Public Works Superintendent Parks Maintenance Dept. of Public Works Dept. of Public Works Dept. of Public Works Dept. of Public Works Dept. of Mobility & Infrastructure Dept. of Permits, Licenses, & Inspections Emergency Management Planner Master Firefighter & Inspector Bureau of Fire Emergency Medical Services Pittsburgh Regional Transit Pittsburgh Regional Transit Lead Park Ranger Dept. of Public Safety Dept. of Parks & Recreation last updated: 04/17/2025

Back to top