while in other situations it is caused by lack of policy implementation and enforcement.
Implementing policy may have unexpected results, stemming from a policy whose reach
extends further than the problem it was originally crafted to address. Additionally,
unpredictable results may arise from selective or idiosyncratic enforcement of policy.
[4] The intended effects of a policy vary widely according to the organization and
the context in which they are made. Broadly, policies are typically instituted to
avoid some negative effect that has been noticed in the organization, or to seek some
positive benefit. [citation needed] A way to extract the stated aims of a public policy
is to analyze the goals embedded in the legislation that establishes it. [5] This
approach helps clarify the explicit intentions behind a policy and provides a normative
foundation for evaluating its effectiveness in practice. A meta-analysis of policy
studies concluded that international treaties that aim to foster global cooperation
have mostly failed to produce their intended effects in addressing global challenges,
and sometimes may have led to unintended harmful or net negative effects. The study
suggests enforcement mechanisms are the "only modifiable treaty design choice" with
the potential to improve the effectiveness. [6][7] The State of California provides
an example of benefit-seeking policy. In recent years, the numbers of hybrid cars
in California has increased dramatically, in part because of policy changes in Federal
law that provided USD $1, 500 in tax credits (since phased out) and enabled the use
of high-occupancy vehicle lanes to drivers of hybrid vehicles. In this case, the organization
(state or federal government) created an effect (increased ownership and use of hybrid
vehicles) through policy (tax breaks, highway lanes). [8] Policies frequently have
side effects or unintended consequences. Because the environments that policies seek
to influence or manipulate are typically complex adaptive systems (e. g. governments,
societies, large companies), making a policy change can have counterintuitive results.
For example, a government may make a policy decision to raise taxes, in hopes of increasing
overall tax revenue. Depending on the size of the tax increase, this may have the
overall effect of reducing tax revenue by causing capital flight or by creating a
rate so high that citizens are deterred from earning the money that is taxed. [a][9]
The policy formulation process theoretically includes an attempt to assess as many
areas of potential policy impact as possible, to lessen the chances that a given policy
will have unexpected or unintended consequences. [10] In political science, the policy
cycle is a tool commonly used for analyzing the development of a policy. It can also
be referred to as a "stages model" or "stages heuristic". It is thus a rule of thumb
rather than the actual reality of how policy is created, but has been influential
in how political scientists looked at policy in general. [11] It was developed as
a theory from Harold Lasswell's work. It is called the policy cycle as the final stage