be out on the rivers. The Pittsburgh Bureau of Fire boat will also be on the water
with three firefighters. It should also be noted that the Pennsylvania Department
of Conservation and Natural resources will close the Point State Park wharves to boat
mooring on the Allegheny and Monongahela rivers on Sunday, July 4. Motorcycle medic
units with the Pittsburgh Bureau of EMS will be operating near the various viewing
points in the City to more easily reach and treat patients in crowded areas. Traditional
medic units will also stage near key fireworks viewing points on Mount Washington,
the North Side, and Downtown. One of the things they will be watching out for is heat-related
ailments. Temperatures are forecast to be in the 80’s with mostly sunny skies on Independence
Day. Dr. Donald Yealy, Chief Medical Officer with UPMC, says the most important thing
to remember is that everyone’s body is a heat generator and we have to learn how to
dissipate, or get rid of heat. “Things that either increase the amount of heat we
are making or decrease our ability to get rid of the heat will put us at risk for
having a complication, whether that is heat exhaustion or heat stroke, ” says Yealy.
“We become dehydrated from not drinking enough fluids or drinking the wrong fluids…alcohol
is the wrong fluid as it goes out quickly. Certain medications can make us prone to
either dehydration or less responsive to heat stresses. Those are things that either
make us lose fluids or impair our ability to respond to heat. ” The Public Safety
Director would also like to remind people of the dangers that consumer grade fireworks
pose. “Although sales of consumer fireworks are legal, they remain a fire hazard and
a safety concern. As a reminder, fireworks are not allowed in Point State Park or
any City park. In addition, the use of any fireworks, even those that are legal, are
prohibited within 150 feet of any structure, ” said Hissrich. “And please, remember
your pets. Fireworks can startle pets, which are more sensitive to loud noises and
flashing lights, sometimes causing them to run away or hide. ” In an effort to curb
the illegal use of fireworks, the Fireworks Task Force will continue with its enforcement
efforts until July 5. And finally, although the situation has vastly improved, the
pandemic is not over. Those who are not vaccinated are strongly encouraged to wear
a mask. Even though Sunday's activities are primarily outdoors, the virus still poses
a risk to those who are not inoculated with one of CDC-approved, COVID-19 vaccines.
“This weekend will always involve a certain amount of congregation. That’s what people
do during holidays. If you’re fully vaccinated, that’s not a concern. But if you’re
not, please wear that mask. The COVID-19 virus is still here with us, ” says Dr. Yealy.
From all of us at Public Safety, we wish you a happy and safe Fourth of July holiday