kept safe. PITTSBURGH, PA (Oct. 25, 2018) – Police arrested 11 people Thursday evening
for blocking traffic during a protest in front of the Allegheny County Jail. Ten of
the 11 protesters were cited and released — and permitted to continue protesting on
the sidewalk — on charges of obstruction of roadways. One protester was booked into
the county jail after she refused to give her identification to arresting officers.
The protesters stopped traffic on Second Avenue shortly after 5 p. m. Second Avenue
is designated as a Yellow Zone, according to protest guidelines published by Public
Safety on July 27. Per the guidelines, traffic in Yellow Zones cannot be blocked during
a. m. and p. m. rush hour times. If they are, Police will issue three warnings, with
the second warning coming five minutes after the first, and the third warning coming
two minutes after the second. In this case, Police issued warnings at 5: 16 p. m.
, 5: 28 p. m. and 5: 42 p. m. When officers moved in to clear the roadway, the majority
of protesters returned to the sidewalk, but 11 did not. The City remains committed
to protecting the First Amendment rights of protesters while assuring that all people
– from protesters to city residents and motorists who may be affected by road closures
– are kept safe. 25/10/2018 19: 27: 02 INVESTIGATION: Search for Assault, Carjacking
Suspect FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE PITTSBURGH, PA (October 25, 2018) --Pittsburgh Bureau
of Police detectives are searching for a suspect in connection with a violent assault
and carjacking at Wharton Square on Wednesday, October 24, 2018. Pittsburgh EMS, Zone
3 Police Officers, the Major Crimes Unit, and GVI Unit responded to the Giant Eagle
at approximately 7: 48 p. m. Upon arrival, Public Safety personnel observed an unidentified
woman with severe facial injuries. Medics were able to stabilize the woman and transport
her to the hospital where she is in serious condition. The initial investigation reveals
the woman drove to the Soho neighborhood and picked up a known male actor along Fifth
Avenue. Then, around 5: 57 p. m. she and the actor parked the vehicle in the area
of Merriman Way and S. 21st Street. At some point she was beaten and possibly pistol-whipped.
The actor then got behind the wheel of the car, and at approximately 7: 36 p. m. he
drove her vehicle behind the Wharton Square Giant Eagle and threw her out of the car.
The actor fled the scene in the victim’s vehicle. The victim was able to walk to the
grocery store for help. Pittsburgh Police Major Crimes detectives and the GVI Unit
are investigating the incident and searching for the victim's vehicle. The vehicle
is described as a dark blue Nissan Versa with the license plate K-M-V-6-6-2-9. If
anyone has information about this carjacking and assault, please give police a call
at 412-323-7800. FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE PITTSBURGH, PA (October 25, 2018) --Pittsburgh