street-ready to ever emerge from any fire academy in the country, ” said Pittsburgh
Bureau of Fire Chief Darryl Jones. “We are very proud of that fact. ” Public Safety
Director Lee Schmidt spoke of the community that often forms with the job. “You have
a whole group of other fellow firefighters that are here to support you. Some days
are going to be harder than others, but you can persevere and you can make it through
as long as you have the support that you need. ” Mayor Ed Gainey administered the
Oath of Office after calling for a standing ovation and thanking families. “To the
families, I want to say ‘thank you. ’ Thank you, because at the end of the day, I
know you watched them grow as they arrived at this moment. We know the power of love
and support and what it does. Thank you for your dedication to making them believe
in themselves. ” After being granted the traditional weekend off after graduation
by Chief Jones, firefighters will begin work with their platoons next week. 11/2/2022
13: 46: 24 Pittsburgh Bureau of EMS Holds Swearing-In and Promotions Ceremony PITTSBURGH,
PA (March 4, 2022) – Pittsburgh Bureau of Emergency Medical Services held a swearing-in
ceremony Friday for EMTs and paramedics. The ceremony was held in Council Chambers
at the City-County Building. Three new EMTs and ten paramedics were sworn in during
the ceremony. One paramedic received a promotion. Romi Chaouk, Williams McHenry and
Logan Ondos were sworn in as EMTs. Robert Catley, Willem deBoer, Ryan Kesting, Zachary
Koenecke, Brandon Prevost, Samuel Rest, Andrew Schartner, Michael Schmidt, Cameron
Rogers and Graham Weston were sworn in as paramedics. Paramedic Edward Parker was
promoted. Kicking off the ceremony, EMS Chief Ronald Romano directly addressed the
families. “Thank you for supporting them in the work they do for the city’s citizens.
Thank you for sharing them with us and understanding when they miss a family event
because they are helping someone else. ” Medical Director for the City of Pittsburgh
Dr. Ronald Roth cited the foundational and revolutionary history of emergency care
in Pittsburgh by the Freedom House Ambulance Service. Established in 1967, it was
the first emergency medical service to provide training beyond basic first aid. The
team of mostly Black paramedics set the standard for emergency care not only for future
Pittsburgh paramedics, but programs around the country. “This legacy continues today,
” he said. “Not satisfied with that success, Pittsburgh EMS is on the forefront of
treating victims of opioid overdose. We actually start treating victims in the field.
We are one of only three or four other agencies in the country to do this. ” Public
Safety Director Lee Schmidt connected that past with the new potential in the Bureau
of EMS. “You are now a part of that history. I want you to think about the future,
and think about what we as Pittsburgh can continue to do to create new pathways for