15th St and Burdick Dr, which is named after former dean James Green. [50] The KU
School of Engineering is a public engineering school located on the main campus. The
School of Engineering was founded officially in 1891, although engineering degrees
were awarded as early as 1873. [51] In the U. S. News & World Report's "America's
Best Colleges" 2021 issue, KU's School of Engineering was ranked tied for 102nd among
218 engineering schools whose highest degree is a doctorate. [48] Notable alumni include
Charles E. Spahr (1934), the former CEO of Standard Oil of Ohio. In addition to its
academic programs, the William Allen White School of Journalism and Mass Communications
sponsors publications including The University Daily Kansan, Jayplay magazine, and
KUJH TV. The University of Kansas Medical Center features three schools: the School
of Medicine, School of Nursing, and School of Health Professions that each has its
own programs of graduate study. As of the Fall 2013 semester, there were 3, 349 students
enrolled at KU Med. [52] The Medical Center also offers four-year instruction at the
Wichita campus, and features a medical school campus in Salina, Kansas devoted to
rural health care. The University of Kansas Health System is co-located at the University
of Kansas Medical Center. KU's Edwards Campus (KUEC) is in Overland Park, Kansas.
Established in 1993, its goal is to provide adults with the opportunity to complete
undergraduate, graduate, and certificate programs. About 2, 000 students attend the
Edwards Campus, with an average age of 31. [53] The School of Professional Studies
(SPS) was formed in 2019[54] and is headquartered at KUEC. Many SPS programs have
classes on the grounds. Other programs like Criminal Justice[55] within SPS hold classes
on the Lawrence Main Campus. Holding classes on the main campus allows for the Criminal
Justice program to hold larger classes, like the popular courses like Notorious Kansas
Murders and Murderers, taught by Dr. Stephen Bell[56] or Criminal Activity Bonnie
& Clyde taught by Professor Misty Campbell. [57] Near the beginning of the 2018–2019
school year, KU launched classes in Leavenworth, Kansas, offering classes to "both
civilian and military" students, emphasizing a "high priority in supporting military-affiliated
students". The Leavenworth classes offer both undergraduate and graduate courses.
[58] KU's School of Business launched interdisciplinary management science graduate
studies in operations research during Fall Semester 1965. The program provided the
foundation for decision science applications supporting NASA Project Apollo Command
Capsule Recovery Operations. KU's academic computing department was an active participant
in setting up the Internet and is the developer of the early Lynx text-based web browser.
Lynx provided hypertext browsing and navigation prior to Tim Berners Lee's invention
of HTTP and HTML. [59] The University of Kansas has had teams representing them athletically
since at least 1867, a year after classes officially started. Starting in 1867, a
baseball team made up of KU students represented the University of Kansas in games