titular chancellor similar to those in England and Wales, with day-to-day operations
typically handled by a vice-chancellor. The vice-chancellor usually carries the joint
title of "president and vice-chancellor" or "rector and vice-chancellor". In Finland,
if the university has a chancellor (Finnish: Kansleri, Swedish: Kansler), they are
the leading official in the university. The duties of the chancellor are mainly to
promote sciences and to look after the best interests of the university. As the rector
of the university (Finnish: rehtori, Swedish: rektor) remains the de facto administrative
leader and chief executive official, the role of the chancellor is more of a social,
political and even historical nature. However some administrative duties still belong
to the chancellor's jurisdiction despite their often arguably ceremonial nature. Examples
of these include the appointment of new professors and docents. The chancellor of
University of Helsinki (the oldest and largest in Finland) has also the right to be
present and to speak in the plenary meetings of the Council of State when matters
regarding the university are discussed. Despite their role as the chancellor of only
one university, they are often regarded as the political representative of Finland's
entire university institution when they exercise their rights in the Council of State.
In the history of Finland the office of the chancellor dates all the way back to the
Swedish Empire, and later the Russian Empire. Historically the chancellor's duty was
to function as the official representative of the monarch in the autonomous university.
The number of chancellors in Finnish universities has declined over the years, and
in the vast majority of Finnish universities the highest official is the rector. The
remaining universities with chancellors are University of Helsinki and Åbo Akademi
University. In France, chancellor (chancelier) is one of the titles of the rector
(recteur), a senior civil servant of the Ministry of Education serving as manager
of a regional educational district (académie). In his capacity as chancellor, the
rector awards academic degrees to the university's graduates, oversees the legality
of the universities' executive acts and channels funding from the ministry. The rector
has no executive function in any university but remains a member ex officio of the
board of every public university in his district. In Poland, the chancellor (kanclerz)
is the head of many universities' administration and the leader of the non-academic
staff while the rector is the academic head. The main academic bodies of the university
consists of: rektor (the head of the university), prorektor (deputy rector), dziekan
(the head of the faculty), prodziekan (deputy head of the faculty), senat (senate:
the main council of the university). In universities with presidential constitution,
the university's president holds both the functions of chancellor and rector. Similarly,
in Germany the chancellor (Kanzler) is the head of the administration, and regularly
is recruited not from a scholarly but from an administrative background. The chancellor
is a member of the governing body of the university Hochschulleitung, which is directed