declared that. .. [s]upport for civil liberties ’is inevitably compromised by persons
who champion civil liberties in the United States and yet who justify or tolerate
the denial of civil liberties by dictatorships abroad’ [and that] it was ’inappropriate
for any person to serve on the governing committees of the Union or on its staff,
who is a member of any political organization which supports totalitarian dictatorship
in any country. .. And, within this category we include organizations in the United
States supporting totalitarian governments of the Soviet Union and of the Fascist
and Nazi countries’. .. The 1940 Resolution provoked an immediate upheaval. [ACLU
Chair and Marxist] Harry Ward resigned and was replaced as chair by the fervently
anti-Communist John Haynes Holmes. .. The two California affiliates, along with Chicago
and Massachusetts, led a move to rescind the resolution. .. When the ACLU board asked
[Elizabeth Gurley Flynn, ACLU Co-founder and Communist party leader, and Stalin supporter,
] to resign, she refused. .. [and] asserted that the ACLU board had no right to bar
her for her ’political beliefs and affiliations’. .. [On May 8, 1940, the ACLU board
voted 10-9 to remove Flynn from the board. ] The antitotalitarian resolution was abolished
in 1968, and her supporters. .. won her posthumous reinstatement to the board in 1976.
" — In Defense of American Liberties: A History of the ACLU, 1990 Feb. 19 - June 22,
1942 - ACLU Split Over Executive Order 9066 - Japanese Internment In response to the
surprise attack on Pearl Harbor on Dec. 7, 1941, President Franklin D. Roosevelt issued
Executive Order 9066 dated Feb. 19, 1942. The order directed the Secretary of War
"to prescribe military areas in such places. .. from which any or all persons may
be excluded. " Although the order makes no reference to Japanese-Americans, by late
spring of 1942 over 100, 000 Japanese-Americans were evacuated to 10 relocation centers
throughout the south and west. The ACLU was "very much divided over the executive
order. .. There were essentially two factions. The first, which included Roger Baldwin,
Norman Thomas, John Haynes Homes, and Arthur Garfield Hays, questioned the constitutionality
of the executive order. The second faction, which included Morris Ernst, did not want
the ACLU to come out against the executive order. .. There were also a few board members
who favored the internment program. One board member compared the Japanese-American
detention to a public health quarantine for measles. " — Defending Everybody: A History
of the American Civil Liberties Union, 1998 Dec. 18, 1944 - ACLU Aids Japanese-American
in Korematsu v. United States "Fred Korematsu was sentenced to jail after refusing
to participate in the forced relocation of more than 100, 000 Japanese Americans to
internment camps as dictated by an executive order [Executive Order 9066 from President
Franklin D. Roosevelt. Korematsu, aided by the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU),
unsuccessfully sued the government for violating his constitutional rights. And after