system, like Shen Buhai (400–337 BC), may have had the most influence, and could be
considered its founders, if they are not valuable as rare pre-modern examples of the
abstract theory of administration. Creel writes that, in Shen Buhai, there are the
"seeds of the civil service examination", and that, if one wishes to exaggerate, it
would "no doubt be possible to translate Shen Buhai's term Shu, or technique, as 'science'",
and argue that he was the first political scientist, though Creel does "not care to
go this far". [27] In the 18th century, King Frederick William I of Prussia created
professoriates in Cameralism in order to train a new class of public administrators.
The universities of Frankfurt an der Oder and the University of Halle were Prussian
institutions emphasizing economic and social disciplines, with the goal of societal
reform. Johann Heinrich Gottlob Justi was a well-known professor of Cameralism. Lorenz
von Stein, an 1855 German professor from Vienna, is considered the founder of the
science of public administration in many parts of the world. [citation needed]In the
time of Von Stein, public administration was considered a form of administrative law,
but Von Stein believed this concept was too restrictive. Von Stein taught that public
administration relies on many pre-established disciplines such as sociology, political
science, administrative law, and public finance. He called public administration an
integrating science and stated that public administrators should be concerned with
both theory and practice. He argued that public administration is a science because
knowledge is generated and evaluated according to the scientific method. [citation
needed] The father of public administration in the US is considered to be Woodrow
Wilson. [28] He first formally recognized public administration in an 1887 article
entitled "The Study of Administration". The future president wrote that "it is the
object of administrative study to discover, first, what government can properly and
successfully do, and, secondly, how it can do these proper things with the utmost
possible efficiency and at the least possible cost either of money or energy. "[29]
By the 1920s, scholars of public administration had responded to Wilson's solicitation
and textbooks in this field were introduced. Distinguished scholars of that period
include Luther Gulick, Lyndall Urwick, Henri Fayol, and Frederick Taylor. Taylor argued
in The Principles of Scientific Management, that scientific analysis would lead to
the discovery of the "[a] best way" to do things or carry out an operation. Taylor's
technique was introduced to private industrialists, and later to various government
organizations. [30] In 1937, the Brownlow Committee, which was a presidentially commissioned
panel of political science and public administration experts, recommended sweeping
changes to the executive branch of the U. S. federal government, including the creation
of the Executive Office of the President. Based on these recommendations, President
Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1939 lobbied Congress to approve the Reorganization Act of
1939. The Act led to Reorganization Plan No. 1, [31] which created the office, [32]