and decorated with floral designs reminiscent of the 18th century rosemaling technique. Because living and bedrooms were often merged into one room during this era, two of the panels swing open as if they would reveal traditional built-in-beds, but instead conceal the blackboard. The room features high-sloped ceilings reflective of those in Nordic peasant homes that keep snow from accumulating during the severe winters. Spruce boards are laid in a herringbone pattern slanting upward to a plane of flat boards decorated by two hand-carved, painted rosettes with a symbol for the midnight sun. Wooden chandeliers bearing a painted design incorporating "1945", the year the room was opened, hang from the flat surfaces. The professor's section of the room has a low raftered ceiling. The transition between the two parts of the room is indicated by a corner kleberstone fireplace in which birch logs were burned standing on end to assure that smoke would rise up the chimney. Windows are of handmade opalescent glass tinted pale yellow. Since a bay window is not a Scandinavian tradition, the area is plastered, paved with slate, and treated as a traditional alcove. The student tablet armchairs are low-backed and the professor's chair is of a typical Viking design with carved heads of beasts and an intertwining dragon motif that traditionally serves as a symbol that protects against evil. The room features a century-old grandfather clock with an engraved dial and a case that is painted to match the wall decorations of the smaller room. Above the rear wall bench and flanked by corner display cabinets decorated with rosemaling, hangs a framed copy of a 1695 Norwegian woolen tapestry depicting the Biblical parable of the five wise and five foolish virgins. [46] The Philippine Nationality Room[47] began construction on May 3, 2018, overcoming a prior hold on the project since 2011. [11][48] The design of the Philippine room is based on a traditional bahay na bato. [11] Meaning "house of stone", bahay na bato is a long-lasting type of home that became popular in the Philippines during the years of Spanish rule (mid-1500s to 1898). The room is particularly based on the interiors of the Quema House in the city of Vigan. [49] The Philippine Nationality Room was designed by Pittsburgh architect Warren Bulseco and Philippine architect Melinda Minerva “Popi” Laudico. Professor Fernando Zialcita, a noted authority on Philippine ancestral houses from Ateneo de Manila University, served as adviser to the project. Filipino-American artist Eliseo Art Silva created paintings for the room. The room features lattice-patterned windows using capiz shells, a popular alternative to glass in the Philippines. The chairs are backed with solihiya, rattan woven into a sunburst pattern. An etched silver Murano mirror from Europe and a bronze chandelier from the United States highlight the role of imported design in Filipino culture. Other artifacts showcase pre-Colonial cultures. The Golden Tara is a Hindu sculpture viewed by the Manobo tribe as a protective nature spirit. The Manunggul Jar, excavated from a Neolithic burial site in Palawan, depicts human figures traveling in a boat to the afterlife. The room's ceremonial key, designed by Christopher Purpura, incorporates mythological figures from the Meranao people of Mindanao—the serpent Naga and the bird Sarimanok. The Polish Classroom was inspired by rooms in Kraków's Wawel Castle, for centuries the residence of kings. The Polish astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus, and the science that his theories revolutionized, are also a major theme of the room. A replica of the famous Jan Matejko portrait of Copernicus shows him as a young man pursuing his study of the universe from a workshop on the roof of his uncle's house in Allenstein (Olsztyn). In the bay stands an enlarged replica of the 16th-century Jagiellonian globe, one of the oldest existing globes to depict North America as a separate continent. The original globe was only eight inches high and was designed to operate as a clock and calendar. It took a metalsmith in Kraków five years to complete the large globe in this room. Artists from Kraków also came to Pittsburgh to paint the ceiling of 18-foot (5. 5 m) beams with informal geometric Renaissance decorations. The room is illuminated by a bronze chandelier bearing a stylized Polish eagle. The walnut seminar table was copied from one in a state dining room at Wawel Castle. The windows combine hexagonal handmade roundels, similar to those in Wawel Castle, with stained-glass coats of arms representing Polish institutions of higher education. The cornerstone is a fragment of Gothic cornice preserved from the Collegium Maius (1369), the ancient Jagiellonian Library. Poland's music is represented by the original manuscript of Ignace Paderewski's only opera, Manru, which is displayed in the archive cabinet. The Romanian Classroom was designed in Bucharest by Nicolae Ghica-Budeşti. The carved door frame is characteristic of stone thresholds of Romanian monasteries and is made is of American limestone selected due to its similarity to Romanian limestone used in the royal palace at Bucharest. The entrance door of the Romanian Classroom is ornately carved oak reminiscent of Byzantine churches in Romania. The words of Vasile Alecsandri, one of the greatest Romanian poets of the 19th century, are carved overhead in the stone door frame from his Ode to the Year 1855: "The Romanian is like the mighty rock which amidst the waves of the stormy and majestic sea forever remains unmoved. " The floor is laid in square blocks of pink marble imported from quarries at Ruşchiţa. The black boards are set in arched oak panels, carved in a manner of icon screens in Eastern Orthodox and Greek Catholic Romanian churches. These are separated by carved-twisted rope which suggests the Roman origin of many of Romania's artistic traditions. Ancient original icons from Romania depicting the Virgin and Child, Christ, the Dormition of the Virgin, and Saint Mark are embedded in the upper section of each panel. White arca paint mixed with color gives the smooth plastered walls a bluish pink tint. A Byzantine-style mosaic embedded in the rear wall, a gift of the Romanian government, was executed by Bucharest ceramicist Nora Steriade in gold, turquoise, bronze, ruby red, and black pieces of glass, and was originally part of the Romanian Pavilion at the 1939 New York World's Fair. [50] The lettering for the inscription and for the entrance text is the work of Alexander Seceni. The mosaic depicts Constantin Brâncoveanu, Prince of Wallachia, who refused to recant the Christian faith even at the cost of his own life and the lives of the male members of his family. The six windows have rounded Romanesque heads reflecting tradition brought from Rome when they conquered the original Dacian settlers in 106 AD. Two small window casements are deeply recessed and have marble window ledges. The four large center windows, form an alcove shut off from the main part of the room by an iron grilled gates wrought in Romania and hung in an arch. These gates swing back in folded sections against the plastered wall. A slab of polished marble tops the wrought-iron radiator grille. Yellow silk draperies frame the windows and ancient icons befitting the season and holidays are exhibited in the alcove which is reminiscent of an icon shrine in