A business incubator is an organization that helps startup companies and individual
entrepreneurs to develop their businesses by providing a fullscale range of services,
starting with management training and office space, and ending with venture capital
financing. [1] The National Business Incubation Association (NBIA) defines business
incubators as a catalyst tool for either regional or national economic development.
NBIA categorizes its members' incubators by the following five incubator types: academic
institutions; non-profit development corporations; for-profit property development
ventures; venture capital firms, and a combination of the above. [2] Business incubators
differ from research and technology parks in their dedication to startup and early-stage
companies. Research and technology parks, on the other hand, tend to be large-scale
projects that house everything from corporate, government, or university labs to very
small companies. Most research and technology parks do not offer business assistance
services, which are the hallmark of a business incubation program. However, many research
and technology parks house incubation programs. [3] Incubators also differ from the
U. S. Small Business Administration's Small Business Development Centers (and similar
business support programs) in that they serve only selected clients. Congress created
the Small Business Administration in the Small Business Act of July 30, 1953. Its
purpose is to "aid, counsel, assist and protect, insofar as is possible, the interests
of small business concerns. " In addition, the charter ensures that small businesses
receive a "fair proportion" of any government contracts and sales of surplus property.
[4] SBDCs work with any small businesses at any stage of development, and not only
with startup companies. Many business incubation programs partner with their local
SBDC to create a "one-stop shop" for entrepreneurial support. [5] Within European
Union countries, there are different EU and state funded programs that offer support
in form of consulting, mentoring, prototype creation, and other services and co-funding
for them. [6] In India, the business incubators are promoted in a varied fashion:
as technology business incubators (TBI) and as startup incubators—the first deals
with technology business (mostly, consultancy and promoting technology related businesses)
and the later deals with promoting startups (with more emphasis on establishing new
companies, scaling the businesses, prototyping, patenting, and so forth). [7][8][9][10][11]
The first business incubator was the Batavia Industrial Center, which opened in 1959
in Batavia, New York. [12] Two years earlier, Massey-Harris had announced the closure