SERVICES 52 - PERSONNEL-EMPLOYEE BENEFITS 115 Ethics Hearing Board 116 117 City of
Pittsburgh Operating Budget Ethics Hearing Board Fiscal Year 2025 108100 Mission The
mission of the Ethics Hearing Board is to preserve the trust placed in the public
servants of the City, to promote public confidence in government, to protect the integrity
of government decision making, and to enhance government efficiency. Departmental/Bureau
Overview The Ethics Hearing Board comprises nine members with reputations of personal
integrity and honesty. Designed to be an impartial arm of government, seven of its
nine members are selected by community organizations. The Board’s staff includes an
Executive Director. Those served by the Board include current, former, and prospective
officials and employees (including those acting under contract), consultants, campaign
contributors, and persons and entities who do or seek to do business with the City,
third parties involved with covered conduct, and those who give gifts to covered parties
or their relatives. Ethics Hearing Board services include: Advice - Formal advisory
opinions and informal consultations are critical services of the Board and its Ethics
Officer. Only the Board’s formal advice (and not private counsel) is a defense from
penalties. Education - Employee guidance, policies, trainings; public information
to build trust in government. Disclosures - The Statement of Financial Interests,
Disclosure of Interests, Statement of Affiliations, conflict of interest, campaign
finance, and gift disclosures (starting at $100 aggregate). Disclosures relating to
Valuable Gifts Review (at $500) and waivers are issued with formal advice. Campaign
Finance - Early reporting, outreach, management, audits, confirming campaign finance
contribution limits compliance and other requirements. Enforcement - Public complaints,
preliminary inquiries, investigations, panel meetings, and hearings to evaluate alleged
misconduct; legal action and additional steps to collect fines and penalties. 2024
Accomplishments • Legislation: Extensively analyzed several proposals to update legislation
to be able to issue a new Code of Conduct handbook, and related training • Advice:
Increased access by creating an online advice request form for easy use by former
employees, appointed public officials, nominees, vendors, candidates, campaign donors,
gift donors, affiliated family members, and others under the Board’s jurisdiction
who do not have City of Pittsburgh email/ intranet access; issued formal advisory
opinions (a 275% increase), informal guidance, and new regulations • Campaign finance:
Collaborated with the Clerk’s Office and Council to strategize best methods to streamline
the filing process for candidates and their committees • Disclosures: Overhauled the
Statement of Affiliations for improved identification of potential conflicts • Investigations
and Enforcement: Continued efforts to investigate and, when applicable, prosecuted
ethics complaints and enforced violations 118 City of Pittsburgh Operating Budget
Ethics Hearing Board Fiscal Year 2025 108100 Position Summary 2024 Rate/ Hours/ 2024
2025 Rate/ Hours/ 2025 Title FTE Grade Months Budget FTE Grade Months Budget Executive
Director 1 32G 12 $ 107, 490 1 32G 12 $ 110, 718 Total Full-Time Permanent Positions
1 $ 107, 490 1 $ 110, 718 Temporary, Part-Time, and Seasonal Allowances Interns —