the Depression worsened, Pittsburgh ethnics voted heavily for the Democrats, especially
in 1934, making the city a stronghold of the New Deal Coalition. By 1936, Democratic
programs for relief and jobs, especially the WPA, were so popular with the ethnics
that a large majority voted for the Democrats. [68][69] Joseph Guffey, statewide leader
of the Democrats, and his local lieutenant David Lawrence gained control of all federal
patronage in Pittsburgh after Roosevelt's landslide victory in 1932 and the election
of a Democratic mayor in 1933. Guffey and Lawrence used the New Deal programs to increase
their political power and build up a Democratic machine that superseded the decaying
Republican machine. Guffey acknowledged that a high rate of people on relief was not
only "a challenge" but also "an opportunity". He regarded each relief job as Democratic
patronage. [70] Pittsburgh was at the center of the "Arsenal of Democracy" that provided
steel, aluminum, munitions and machinery for the U. S. during World War II. Pittsburgh's
mills contributed 95 million tons of steel to the war effort. The increased production
output created a workforce shortage, which resulted in African Americans moving en
masse during the Second Great Migration from the South to the city in order to find
work. [11] David Lawrence, a Democrat, served as mayor of Pittsburgh from 1946 to
1959 and as Pennsylvania's governor from 1959 to 1963. [71] Lawrence used his political
power to transform Pittsburgh's political machine into a modern governmental unit
that could run the city well and honestly. [72] In 1946 Lawrence decided to enforce
the Smoke Control Ordinance of 1941 because he believed smoke abatement was crucial
for the city's future economic development. However, enforcement placed a substantial
burden on the city's working-class because smoky bituminous coal was much less expensive
than smokeless fuels. One round of protests came from Italian-American organizations,
which called for delay in enforcing it. Enforcement raised their cost of living and
threatened the jobs of their relatives in nearby bituminous coal mines. Despite dislike
of the smoke abatement program, Italian Americans strongly supported the reelection
of Lawrence in 1949, in part because many of them were on the city payroll. [73] Rich
and productive, Pittsburgh was also the "Smoky City", with smog sometimes so thick
that streetlights burned during the day[11] as well as rivers that resembled open
sewers. Civic leaders, notably Mayor David L. Lawrence, elected in 1945, Richard K.
Mellon, chairman of Mellon Bank and John P. Robin[74][75] began smoke control and
urban revitalization, also known as Urban Renewal projects that transformed the city[11]
in unforeseen ways. "Renaissance I" began in 1946. Title One of the Housing Act of
1949 provided the means in which to begin. By 1950, vast swaths of buildings and land
near the Point were demolished for Gateway Center. 1953 saw the opening of the (since
demolished) Greater Pittsburgh Municipal Airport terminal. [27] In the late 1950s
and early 1960s, the lower Hill District, an area inhabited predominantly by poor