Hoffa surrenders to federal officials and receives a long sentence while Connelly's
uncle, Frank Fitzsimmons, assumes control of the Teamsters. Ciaro is also convicted
but on lesser charges and quickly obtains early release from prison. D'Allesandro
advises him to have the Teamsters endorse Richard M. Nixon for president in 1968 in
exchange for Hoffa receiving a presidential pardon. Hoffa is pardoned by the Nixon
administration but learns that, because of a deal struck between the White House and
Fitzsimmons, he is forbidden to have any contact with the Teamsters for ten years.
Hoffa becomes furious and meets with D'Allesandro, asking him to have Fitzsimmons
killed, resulting in a failed attempt to assassinate him with a car bomb. D'Allesandro
believes that Hoffa has become "too hot" with his public antics and declines to help
him any further. In response, Hoffa has Ciaro deliver a message to D'Allesandro that
unless Fitzsimmons is dealt with, Hoffa will go to the press. D'Allesandro replies
that he will meet with Hoffa at a nearby diner the next day to work out a plan. Hoffa
and Ciaro spend several hours waiting in the diner's parking lot, but D'Allesandro
fails to show up. A union driver has been waiting for hours in the dining room, claiming
mechanical problems with his truck. He and Ciaro start talking, and Ciaro lets him
take some coffee to Hoffa, who is waiting in the car. The "driver" pulls out a silenced
pistol and kills Hoffa and Ciaro. He is immediately driven off in a car that pulls
up; at the same time, men emerge from the truck, toss Ciaro's body in Hoffa's car,
drive it inside, and leave. In 1982, George Barrie hired Robin Moore to write a screenplay
for a biopic called The Jimmy Hoffa Story for GB Pictures International, with Hoffa's
attorney Frank Ragnaro serving as a script consultant. The screenplay was later retitled
Hoffa and filming was originally projected to commence in the spring of 1984, but
no progress occurred. In 1989 Joe Isgro, Edward R. Pressman, and Chaldecot Chubb purchased
the rights to Moore's screenplay and hired David Mamet to rewrite it for $1 million.
Pressman considered Barry Levinson, Oliver Stone, and John McTiernan to direct the
film. Levinson was the frontrunner but chose to decline after Mamet refused to make
script changes. Pressman hired Danny DeVito to direct in April 1990. Jack Nicholson
was hired to play Hoffa after Kevin Spacey, Al Pacino, and Robert De Niro also auditioned.
Both Pacino and De Niro would star in the 2019 Martin Scorsese film The Irishman,
with the former playing Hoffa. [4] DeVito secured a $50 million budget for the film
by forgoing his salary and signing as co-guarantor for the film. Production was originally
set to begin in Washington D. C. in January 1992 but was delayed because of Nicholson
and DeVito's commitments to other films. It would ultimately last between February
and June 1992 in Pittsburgh, Detroit, Chicago, and soundstages in Los Angeles. Carnegie