such as Shop 'n Save, FoodLand, and County Market have much of a presence in the area. The construction of new supercenters, including Walmart and others, and no frills supermarkets such as Aldi attracting value-seeking customers have somewhat decreased Giant Eagle's regional market share in the first decades of the twenty-first century. Giant Eagle's market dominance in Greater Pittsburgh has led to accusations of the company buying up either existing supermarket locations or prime real estate for the sole purpose of not allowing a competitor come in. [47] A notable example came in 2016, when the chain purchased property in McCandless, Pennsylvania, that had been planned for a Walmart location near an existing Giant Eagle; Walmart later backed out and Giant Eagle made no immediate announcement of plans for the property. [48] The deal came only weeks after Giant Eagle laid off 350 workers from its corporate office. [49] Giant Eagle was also successful in blocking a Walmart location opening at the dilapidated Northern Lights Shopping Center in Economy, Pennsylvania, though Walmart eventually opened a location on the hillside behind the property in 2014 after finding a loophole around Giant Eagle's lease at Northern Lights; [50] Giant Eagle ultimately closed this location on January 2, 2021. [10] During Giant Eagle's ownership of GetGo, similar accusations were also made about GetGo not allowing Sheetz or Speedway opening up locations within the Pittsburgh city limits while GetGo has, although both competitor chains have several locations within the immediate suburbs. [51] 7-Eleven's 2021 acquisition of Speedway made the issue partially moot as 7-Eleven has operated multiple locations within the Pittsburgh city limits for decades, though Sheetz remained "locked out" by GetGo. [52] Aside from 7-Eleven, locally-based Coen Markets also operated within the Pittsburgh city limits during Giant Eagle's ownership, while Couche-Tard had previously closed or sold off the handful of Circle K locations it did have within the Pittsbrugh city limits prior to acquiring GetGo. Two months after the sale of GetGo to Couche-Tard closed, Sheetz announced it would build a location in Pittsburgh's Banksville neighborhood, marking Sheetz's first location in the Pittsburgh city limits since the 1990s. [53] Before Walmart, Giant Eagle's last nationally-significant competitor in the Pittsburgh market was Kroger, which had bought the original Eagle but exited Western Pennsylvania in 1984 due to labor issues with its union as well as the local economy at the time. Many Giant Eagle locations in Pennsylvania and Northeast Ohio occupy former Kroger sites and used the distinctive Kroger prototypes from the 1980s with the sloped glass-roof entrance until most of the stores were remodeled or replaced with newer stores in the early 2000s with Giant Eagle's current prototype. Kroger and Giant Eagle still compete head-to-head in Morgantown, Columbus and Indianapolis. Despite the perceived monopoly, Giant Eagle holds only a 32% market share in Pittsburgh as of August 2018, just barely edging out Walmart. [54] In 2022, Giant Eagle fell behind Walmart, [46] leaving open the possibility of a return of Kroger to the area or Meijer moving in. [55]