and hunters, though traditionally their main diet has come from farming. For the Iroquois, farming was traditionally women's work and the entire process of planting, maintaining, harvesting and cooking was done by women. [196] Gathering has also traditionally been the job of women and children. Wild roots, greens, berries and nuts were gathered in the summer. During spring, sap is tapped from the maple trees and boiled into maple syrup, and herbs are gathered for medicine. After the coming of Europeans, the Iroquois started to grow apples, pears, cherries, and peaches. [196] Historically, the main crops cultivated by the Iroquois were corn, beans, and squash, which were called the three sisters (De-oh-há-ko) and in Iroquois tradition were considered special gifts from the Creator. [196] These three crops could be ground up into hominy and soups in clay pots (later replaced by metal pots after contact with Europeans). [196] Besides the "Three Sisters", the Iroquois diet also included artichokes, leeks, cucumbers, turnips, pumpkins, a number of different berries such blackberries, blueberries, gooseberries, etc. and wild nuts. [196] Ramson, a species of wild onion, is also a part of traditional Iroquois cuisine, [215] as well as northern redcurrant, [216] American groundnut, [217] and broadleaf toothwort. [218] Using these ingredients they prepared meals of boiled cornbread and cornmeal sweetened with maple syrup, known today as Indian pudding. Cornmeal was also used to make samp, a type of porridge with beans and dried meat. Reports from early American settlers mention Iroquois extracting corn syrup that was used as a sweetener for cornmeal dumplings. [219] The Iroquois hunted mostly deer but also other game such as wild turkey and migratory birds. Muskrat and beaver were hunted during the winter. Archaeologists have found the bones of bison, elk, deer, bear, raccoon, and porcupines at Iroquois villages. [196] Fishing was also a significant source of food because the Iroquois had villages mostly in the St. Lawrence and Great Lakes areas. The Iroquois used nets made from vegetable fiber with weights of pebbles for fishing. [196] They fished salmon, trout, bass, perch and whitefish until the St. Lawrence became too polluted by industry. In the spring the Iroquois netted, and in the winter fishing holes were made in the ice. [220] Starting about 1620, the Iroquois started to raise pigs, geese and chickens, which they had acquired from the Dutch. [196] In 1644 Johannes Megapolensis described Mohawk traditional wear. In summer they go naked, having only their private parts covered with a patch. The children and young folks to ten, twelve and fourteen years of age go stark naked. In winter, they hang about them simply an undressed deer or bear or panther skin; or they take some beaver and otter skins, wild cat, racoon, martin, otter, mink, squirrel or such like skins . .. and sew some of them to others, until it is a square piece, and that is then a garment for them; or they buy of us Dutchmen two and a half ells [about 170 centimetres (5. 6 ft)] of duffel, and that they hang simply about them, just as it was torn off, without sewing it. [209] On their feet the Iroquois wore moccasin, "true to nature in its adjustment to the foot, beautiful in its materials and finish, and durable as an article of apparel. "[29] The moccason is made of one piece of deer-skin. It is seamed up at the heel, and also in front, above the foot, leaving the bottom of the moccasin without a seam. In front the deer-skin is gathered, in place of being crimped; over this part porcupine quills or beads are worked, in various patterns. The plain moccasin rises several inches above the ankle . .. and is fastened with deer strings; but usually this part is turned down, so as to expose a part of the instep, and is ornamented with bead-work. [29] Moccasins of a sort were also made of corn husks. In 1653 Dutch official Adriaen van der Donck wrote: Around their waist they all [i. e. both men and women] wear a belt made of leather, whalefin, whalebone, or wampum. The men pull a length of duffel cloth—if they have it—under this belt, front and rear, and pass it between the legs. It is over half an ell [35 centimetres (14 in)] wide and nine quarter-ells [155 centimetres (61 in)] long, which leaves a square flap hanging down in front and back . .. Before duffel cloth was common in that country, and sometimes even now when it cannot be had, they took for that purpose some dressed leather or fur—The women also wear a length of woolen cloth of full width [165 centimetres (65 in)] and an ell and a quarter [90 centimetres (35 in)] long, which comes halfway down the leg. It is like a petticoat, but under it, next to the body, they wear a deerskin which also goes around the waist and ends in cleverly cut pointed edging and fringes. The wealthier women and those who have a liking for it wear such skirts wholly embroidered with wampum . .. As for covering the upper part of the body both men and women use a sheet of duffel cloth of full width, i. e. nine and a half quarter-ells, and about three ells 210 centimetres (83 in) long. It is usually worn over the right shoulder and tied in a knot around the waist and from there hangs down to the feet. [209] During the 17th century, Iroquois clothing changed rapidly as a result of the introduction of scissors and needles obtained from the Europeans, and the British scholar Michael Johnson has cautioned that European accounts of Iroquois clothing from the latter 17th century may not have entirely reflected traditional pre-contact Iroquois clothing. [197] In the 17th century women normally went topless in the warm months while wearing a buckskin skirt overlapping on the left while in the winter women covered their upper bodies with a cape-like upper garment with an opening for the head. [221] By the 18th century, cloth colored red and blue obtained from Europeans became the standard material for clothing with the men and women wearing blouses and shirts that usually decorated with beadwork and ribbons and were often worn alongside silver brooches. [222] By the late 18th century, women were wearing muslin or calico long, loose-fitting overdresses. [222] The tendency of Iroquois women to abandon their traditional topless style of dressing in the warm months reflected European influence. [222] Married women wore their hair in a single braid held in place by a comb made of bone, antler or silver while unmarried wore their hair in several braids. [222] Warriors wore moccasins, leggings and short kilts and on occasion wore robes that were highly decorated with painted designs. [222] Initially, men's clothing was made of buckskin and were decorated with porcupine quill-work and later on was made of broadcloth obtained from Europeans. [222] The bodies and faces of Iroquois men were heavily tattooed with geometric designs and their noses and ears were pieced with rings made up of wampun or silver. [222] On the warpath, the faces and bodies of the warriors were