partly outside the City of Pittsburgh shall report on the Taxable Distributions associated
with sales or services rendered within the City of Pittsburgh. Where it is impractical
to determine the exact Taxable Distributions, an apportionment formula may be used.
Any formula so established will be subject to review and correction by the City of
Pittsburgh Finance Department. The data supporting the formula must be maintained
as a part of office records for audit and review purposes. A thorough description
explaining the formula shall be attached to the first return each year. The data supporting
the formula shall be maintained for at least three (3) years as a part of office records
for audit and review purposes. g. Partners and Self-employed individuals who have
Compensation from sources within and without Pennsylvania, may apportion their Compensation
to the City using the formula used reporting personal income tax on Form PA-40, 61
Pa. Code § 109. 5, by substituting the word “City” for the “Commonwealth” where necessary.
In making that calculation, all intrastate sales and services within Pennsylvania
are deemed allocated to the City if the Partner’s or Self-employed individual’s sole
office in Pennsylvania is -7- located in the City. h. An employer which conducts business
in the City of Pittsburgh on a temporary, seasonal or itinerant basis shall file a
return and pay the tax within ten (10) days of the completion of the temporary, seasonal,
or itinerant business. ARTICLE II IMPOSITION OF TAX SECTION 201 – LEVY AND RATE The
tax levied pursuant to the City Code, Title II, Article VII, Chapter 258 is known
as the Payroll Tax. The rate of tax is fifty-five hundredths of a percent (. 55% or
. 0055) of Payroll Expense generated as a result of an employer conducting business
within the City of Pittsburgh. Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P. S. § 6924. 303(a); Local
Tax Enabling Act. 53 P. S. § 6924. 311(12). SECTION 202 – COMPUTATION OF TAX a. The
Payroll Tax is a tax that is levied on Employers. This tax is separate and distinct
from the earned income tax withheld from employees. Under no circumstance should the
Payroll Tax be deducted from the employees’ compensation or benefits. Local Tax Enabling
Act, 53 P. S. § 6924. 303(f). b. The payroll amount apportioned to the City shall
be determined as set forth in Section 102 of the Regulations. c. Tax Base – The tax
shall be paid quarterly and the tax for each quarter shall be computed on the Payroll
Expense of the current quarter attributable to the City of Pittsburgh. The Tax Base
for Partners and Self-Employed individuals is Taxable Distributions associated with
each separate Business within the City. d. An employer which conducts Business in
the City of Pittsburgh on a temporary, seasonal or itinerant basis shall calculate
the tax on the total compensation earned while in the City of Pittsburgh. e. Discontinuing