PITTSBURGH, PA (Sept. 11, 2018) -- Zone 4 detectives have identified the suspect in
a July 30 attempted robbery in Oakland. Police have issued a warrant for Abdul Kenyatta
Thrower, 45, of the North Side. Anyone with information on Thrower's whereabouts is
asked to call Zone 4 Police at (412) 422-6520. Thrower is pictured below. PREVIOUS
RELEASE: PITTSBURGH, PA (August 10, 2018) – Pittsburgh Police detectives are seeking
the public’s help in identifying an attempted robbery suspect. The male in the accompanying
photos is wanted in connection to an attempted robbery on July 30 in Oakland. Around
9: 30 p. m. that day, the suspect followed a female into her apartment building and
then to her apartment door. He waited for the victim to open her door, then pushed
her into her apartment. The suspect tried to take the victim’s wallet and cell phone,
but the victim and her roommate, who was already in the apartment, began to scream.
The suspect fled. Anyone with information on the suspect’s identity or whereabouts
is asked to call Zone 4 Police at (412) 422-6520. 10/8/2018 16: 33: 41 Seven Injured
at Circus PITTSBURGH, PA (September 16, 2018) – Six children and one adult sustained
injuries around 3: 28 p. m. Sunday at PPG Arena during a performance of the Shrine
Circus after a camel became "spooked" and bucked. Five children were transported to
Children’s Hospital of UPMC with minor injuries, and one child was taken to UPMC Mercy
with a fractured arm, which was the most serious injury. One adult was also transported
to a local hospital with minor injuries. As a regular feature of the Shrine Circus,
children are allowed to ride tethered animals led by qualified handlers during the
intermission. In this incident, children and an adult were riding a camel on the main
floor of PPG Arena when the camel, for reasons that remain unknown, got spooked and
bucked. Handlers regained control of the camel within 11 seconds. EMS, which was already
on scene for the event, responded at once and provided medical treatment to the injured.
Police and Public Safety officials also responded. The circus continued with no further
incidents reported. No other animals on the arena floor were affected by the incident.
No animals were injured and all animals, including the camel, were checked out and
cleared by a veterinarian. Pittsburgh Police and the Shrine Circus are reviewing the
incident. PITTSBURGH, PA (September 16, 2018) – Six children and one adult sustained
injuries around 3: 28 p. m. Sunday at PPG Arena during a performance of the Shrine
Circus after a camel became "spooked" and bucked. Five children were transported to
Children’s Hospital of UPMC with minor injuries, and one child was taken to UPMC Mercy
with a fractured arm, which was the most serious injury. One adult was also transported
to a local hospital with minor injuries. As a regular feature of the Shrine Circus,