number of collaborative programs to promote education in science, art, history, and culture. [27] Affiliate organizations exchange ideas, professional research, and information about programming and exhibitions through a variety of activities including lecture, traveling exhibitions, workshops and reciprocal membership. Affiliate organizations share research, exhibitions, and institutional updates through a variety of social media including the Smithsonian Affiliations website, [28] the Affiliate Blog, [29] the quarterly newsletter The Affiliate, [30] the electronic newsletter E-Affiliate, [31] YouTube, Flickr, Facebook and Twitter. The following are representative samples of loans of artifacts, works of art, and scientific specimens loaned by the Smithsonian Institution to Smithsonian Affiliate organizations. The National Museum of American History loaned the Pioneer (locomotive), a Civil War-era locomotive, to the B&O Railroad Museum in Baltimore, Maryland for the exhibit The War Came by Train. [32] Thomas Moran's painting The Grand Canyon of the Yellowstone, in the collection of the Smithsonian American Art Museum, was loaned to the Buffalo Bill Historical Center in Cody, Wyoming. The massive painting was on view from June 1, 2009 through October 31, 2009. [33] Artifacts from the Bisbee Mineral Collection at the National Museum of Natural History were loaned to the Bisbee Mining and Historical Museum in Bisbee, Arizona for use in the exhibit Digging In: Bisbee's Mineral Heritage. [34] Over 140 space objects, including the original Apollo 13 command module and the space suit worn by commanding astronaut James Lovell, were loaned to the Kansas Cosmosphere and Space Center in Hutchinson, Kansas. [35] The Durham Museum in Omaha, Nebraska borrowed 174 artifacts for the exhibit American Originals: Collections from the Smithsonian. Borrowed artifacts included the jacket worn by Bob Keeshan while filming the children's television series, Captain Kangaroo, a three-wheel Westcoaster Mailster used by the United States Postal Service in the 1960s, and two oil on canvass paintings of U. S. Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall and Seneca Chief Red Jacket. [36] The National Museum of American History loaned Kermit the Frog to the National Mississippi River Museum and Aquarium in Dubuque, Iowa for use in the exhibit Toadally Frogs! [37] The Annmarie Sculpture Garden in Solomons, Maryland has over 20 sculptures on loan from the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden. [38] The National Museum of Natural History loaned the Smithsonian Community Reef to the Putnam Museum and IMAX Theatre in Davenport, Iowa. The reef is composed of thousands of crocheted natural reef forms and was a highlight of the Sant Ocean Hall exhibit at the National Museum of Natural History . [39] "The Peoria Falcon, " a sheet of copper stylized in the form of a falcon, was loaned to the Lakeview Museum of Arts and Sciences (now Peoria Riverfront Museum) in Peoria, Illinois by the National Museum of Natural History. The artifact was created during the Mississippian Period and excavated near Peoria, Illinois in the late 1850s. [40] The National Postal Museum loaned the Railway Post Office to the North Carolina Transportation Museum in Spencer, North Carolina. [41] The National Museum of Natural History loaned an 18-karat gold Monopoly set covered with precious gemstones to the Museum of American Finance in New York, New York. The board game was designed by artist Sidney Mobell. [42] The National Museum of Natural History loaned the skeleton of the racehorse, "Lexington, " to the International Museum of the Horse in Lexington, Kentucky[43] The top hat worn by president Abraham Lincoln on the night of his assassination was loaned to the Blackhawk Museum in Danville, California by the National Museum of American History. [44] The exhibit, Smithsonian Expeditions: Exploring Latin American and the Caribbean at the Miami Museum of Science, borrowed several artifacts from the National Museum of Natural History including painted gourds and a 5-foot-tall monolith from the Nicaraguan island of Momotombito. [45] The Historic Arkansas Museum borrowed over 40 artifacts from the National Museum of the American Indian for the exhibit We Walk in Two Worlds: The Caddo, Osage and Quapaw in Arkansas. [46] The Smithsonian American Art Museum loaned three José Campeche paintings to the Museo de Arte de Puerto Rico in San Juan, Puerto Rico. [47] The Senator John Heinz History Center in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania has on loan from the National Museum of American History a Bantam Jeep and a piece of the original Star Spangled Banner Flag. [48] Yokohama prints from the Freer Gallery of Art and the Arthur M. Sackler Gallery were loaned to the Japanese American National Museum in Los Angeles, California for the exhibit Japan After Perry: Views of Yokohama and Meiji Japan. [49] The National Postal Museum loaned stamp designs and drawings created by president Franklin D. Roosevelt to the Blackhawk Museum in Danville, California. [50]