resources away from students who are more likely to be black and more likely to come
from poor neighborhoods towards students who are more likely to be white and come
from higher-income neighborhoods. ” [25] College athletes are required to make up
the difference between NCAA scholarships and the actual cost of living. Tuition shortfalls
amount to thousands of dollars per year and leave about 85% of players to live below
the poverty line. For example, fair market value for a University of Texas football
player was $513, 922. However, players lived $778 below the federal poverty line and
owed $3, 624 in tuition. [27] About 25% of Division I athletes reported food poverty
in the past year and almost 14% reported being homeless in the past year. Erin McGeoy,
a former water polo athlete at George Washington University, explained, “a common
occurrence was that we would run out of meal money halfway through the semester and
that’s when I started to run into troubles of food insecurity. ” She turned to boarding
dogs in her no-dogs-allowed apartment in order to pay rent because housing costs increased
each year but her housing allowance remained static. [28] The NCAA keeps players in
poverty and denied them ways to earn money, while making millions on their performance.
Con 1: Scholarships are fair financial compensation for college athletes, especially
considering the precarious finances of athletic departments. According to the NCAA,
the organization provides “more than $3. 6 billion in athletic scholarships annually
to more than 180, 000 student-athletes. ” Divided equitably, each student would receive
about $20, 000 per year. According to the National Center for Education Statistics,
the average total cost of public college (tuition, fees, room, and board) for the
2017–18 academic year was $17, 797. Considering other scholarships and aid are widely
available and not all college athletes require financial aid, the NCAA scholarships
are generous. [29] [ [30] Further, most college programs do not generate the income
needed to run their athletic programs, much less pay athletes. In fiscal year 2019,
the collective expenses of the 65 Power Five schools–the largest and richest Division
I schools in the NCAA–exceeded revenue by $7 million. Other Division I schools had
an almost $23 million collective difference between revenue and expenses. No Division
II or III schools’ revenue exceeded expenses. [31] If students were paid, the NCAA
argues, many colleges and universities would have to offer fewer scholarships and
the remaining scholarships would be distributed unfairly to top football and men’s
basketball players because those two sports bring in the most revenue. Schools would
also have to cut unprofitable sports including gymnastics, swimming and diving, tennis,
track and field, volleyball, and wrestling. [32] Discrepancies between men’s and women’s
sports such as the weight room during the 2021 NCAA basketball tournament would only
worsen. [40] Paying players would also limit the literal and figurative playing fields
to elite universities with large budgets. As John Thelin, Research Professor of History