The 1934 Pittsburgh Panthers football team, coached by Jock Sutherland, represented the University of Pittsburgh in the 1934 college football season. The Panthers finished the regular season with eight wins and a single loss (to Minnesota at home) and were considered the champions of the East. [1] According to a 1967 Sports Illustrated article, [2] Parke H. Davis, whose selections for 1869 to 1933 (all made in 1933) are recognized as "major" in the official NCAA football records book, [3] named Pitt as one of that season's national champions, along with Minnesota, six months after his death on June 5, 1934. [4] The article contained a "list of college football's mythical champions as selected by every recognized authority [sic] since 1924, " which has served as the basis of the university's historical national championship claims, with Davis being the only major selector for three of them, including the posthumous 1934 pick[5] (post-1933 selections are not "major"). The Pitt coaching staff underwent some off-season changes. Assistant coach Andy Gustafson was hired at Dartmouth University, Bill Kern was promoted to head assistant coach and Dr. Eddie Baker became the head backfield coach. Staffing was completed on February 5, with the appointments of Walter Milligan and Howard O'Dell by the athletic committee. Milligan coached the guards and O'Dell assisted Eddie Baker with the backfield. [16] The yearly stipend given to the football recruits was increased from $400 to $480 for the 1934 season. [17] Prior to spring football practice, Coach Sutherland and his staff held daily meetings at the stadium by position. Each player attended one meeting per week. One night was for centers, one night for tackles and so forth. [18] Coach Sutherland needed to replace 14 Panther players (8 of whom were regulars) who would graduate in June (Robert Hogan, Joseph Skladany, Tarciscio Onder, Frank Walton, James Simms, Frank Tiernan, Arthur Craft, Howard Gelini, Robert Timmons, John Meredith, Richard Matesic, Mike Sebastian, Howard O'Dell and John Love). On March 15, his task began in earnest with the arrival of 73 candidates to the first spring practice session. 41 members of the varsity and 32 rising sophomores from last year's freshman team reported. Another twenty or so were expected in a few days. Coach Sutherland was his usual cautious self: "There are some good prospects for the team, but it is a question of teaching them football. What we learn this spring will mean a lot next fall when we meet Washington and Jefferson, West Virginia, Southern California, Minnesota, Westminster, Nebraska, Notre Dame, Carnegie Tech, and Navy. We can hope for a fair season. "[19] On May 5, the varsity concluded the spring practice period with a game against an alumni team. The varsity prevailed 14 to 0. [20] On September 9, fifty potential squad members bussed to Camp Hamilton for 2 weeks of preseason conditioning in order to prepare for the hardest schedule of coach Sutherland's eleven year career at Pitt. "Jock immediately launched the most intensive preliminary training period that a Pitt squad has experienced, with the result that the players quickly rounded into splendid physical condition and were in near mid-season form when the schedule opened. "[21] On the last morning of camp, the varsity defeated the reserves 40 to 0 in a full game scrimmage. After lunch the Panther entourage returned to Pittsburgh for the start of the fall semester. [22] The Panther athletic department reinstated the 25 cents admittance price for children. "We hope to be able to admit the youngsters for every game, although reservations for one or two of the big contests may interfere, " Director W. Don Harrison declared. [23] On September 29, Pitt and W. & J. met for the last time at Pitt Stadium. This was the thirty-second all-time meeting and Pitt led the series 16–13–2. The Presidents last won in 1924 and had not scored against Pitt in the previous 6 outings. [26] Third-year coach Hank Day hoped to improve on the previous year's 2–7–1 record. Coach Day opined: "You can't build a brick house without bricks. We haven't got the man power to beat Pitt and all I hope is we keep the score down to respectable size. "[27] Despite losing 8 starters and 6 reserves to graduation, coach Sutherland's lineup for the opening game against the Presidents listed 10 veterans and one sophomore - halfback (Bobby LaRue). [28] 15, 000 fans sat through a steady rainfall to watch the Panthers beat the Presidents 26–6. Pitt gained 317 yards and 18 first downs to W. & J. 's 163 yards and 3 first downs. After a scoreless first quarter, Pitt back Bobby LaRue returned a punt to the Presidents 39-yard line. On first down Leo Malarkey lost 4 yards. On second down Henry Weisenbaugh raced 43 yards for the first touchdown of the season. Isadore Weinstock converted the point after and Pitt led 7 to 0. The Panther defense held and Pitt regained possession on their own 45-yard line. A nine play, 55-yard drive ended with a 1-yard plunge into the end zone by Weinstock for Pitt's second touchdown. He missed the placement, but Pitt led at the half 13 to 0. Pitt drove the ball to the Presidents' 13-yard line on the opening drive of the third quarter but lost the ball on downs. On first down W. & J. halfback Don Croft sprinted 87 yards around end for the first W. & J. touchdown against Pitt since 1924. He missed the point after and the score read: Pitt 13 to W. & J. 6. After an exchange of punts, Pitt gained possession on their own 45-yard line. When the quarter ended the Panthers were on the W. & J. 3-yard line. "On the first play Weinstock battered right guard for a touchdown. Weinstock's try for the extra point was wide, but W. & J. was offside and Pitt was awarded the point. Score: Pitt 20; W. & J. 6. " The Presidents advanced the ball to the Pitt 35-yard line, but turned it over on downs. The Panther offense proceeded to march 65 yards in three plays. Leon Shedlosky carried the ball the final 26 yards for the touchdown. Robert McClure missed the point after. Final score: Pitt 26; W. & J. 6. [29] The Pitt starting lineup for the game against Washington & Jefferson was Harvey Rooker (left end), Robert Hoel (left tackle), Charles Hartwig (left guard), George Shotwell (center), Ken Ormiston (right guard), Arthur Detzel (right tackle), Verne Baxter (right end), Miller Munjas (quarterback), Mike Nicksick (left halfback), Bobby LaRue (right halfback) and Isadore Weinstock (fullback).