Teen Membership is a free pass to exploration and discovery available to all teens 13–18 years old who are residents of Pennsylvania. From youth artmaking to teen science challenges, the four Carnegie Museums provide so many creative ways for teens to connect with each other and their world—and, most importantly, to find their own voice.
Teen members enjoy:*
Free general admission to Carnegie Museum of Art, Carnegie Museum of Natural History, Kamin Science Center, and The Andy Warhol Museum until the teen’s 19th birthday
Invitations to events and programming designed just for teen members
Free reciprocal admission at 300+ ASTC museums and science centers
Discounts on classes, camps, educational films at Rangos Giant Cinema, touring exhibitions, laser shows, lectures, and special events
A 10% discount in museum stores and cafés (20% store discount during Member Shopping Days)
Or, print and complete the Teen Membership Application and return it to any of the four Carnegie Museums or mail to: Carnegie Museums ATTN: Membership 4400 Forbes Avenue Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Teen Events
View all events | View all teen events
Carnegie Museum of Natural History
Thu., Oct 9, 2025
5-8 pm
For Members
New events throughout the year
Teen Membership is generously supported by The Grable Foundation .
Community Access Membership is presented by Huntington Bank.
And supported by Giant Eagle Foundation .
*Teen membership benefits are valid for one named teen per membership. Teen membership benefits do not extend to parents, guardians, caregivers, household members, or additional guests. Teen Memberships are not valid for school field trips, group sales, or group visits. Other restrictions may apply.
To qualify for the Teen Membership Program, applicants must be between 13-18 years of age and a resident of the state of Pennsylvania. For teens under 18 years old, parents or legal guardians must give consent. Teen membership benefits are valid for one named teen per membership. Teen membership benefits do not extend to parents, guardians, caregivers, household members, or additional guests. Carnegie Museums reserves the right to cancel any Teen Membership, Family Access Membership, or Organizational Access Membership should an applicant submit incomplete or false information.
Terms of Use for Teen Memberships