Home to Carnegie Museums of Art and Natural History and Carnegie Music Hall, our historic Oakland building offers more than 10 unique spaces for your next event.
Carnegie Music Hall Foyer
The resplendent Music Hall Foyer boasts a soaring 50-foot ceiling of gilded baroque décor supported by pillars of marble from five different countries.
Capacity: Seated – 500 (main floor + balcony) Cocktails – 1,000 Wedding Reception – 320
Carnegie Music Hall
Make your next presentation or meeting a well-orchestrated performance. This newly renovated historic hall now features custom accessible seating, beautifully restored murals, and new sound, lighting, and HVAC systems.
Capacity: Theater seating – 1,550*
*Accessible seating available.
The Café Carnegie
Located on the main floor of the Museum of Art, The Cafe Carnegie is a space made for celebrating in contemporary sophistication.
Capacity: Seated – 120 Cocktails – 120
Scaife Foyer
Connecting art with dinosaurs is the Scaife Foyer, with a floor-to-ceiling view of the Museum of Art Sculpture Court.
Capacity: Cocktails – 300
Hall of Architecture
Inspired by the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus, one of the Seven Wonders of the World, this spectacular room is home to more than 140 plaster-cast replicas of ancient masterpieces.
Capacity: Seated with dance floor – 90 Standing Cocktails  – 150* Wedding Ceremony – 150*
*Seasonal availability–call for details.
Hall of Sculpture
Modeled after the Parthenon’s inner sanctuary, this inspired space features white marble from the same Greek quarries that provided the stone for the Parthenon.
Capacity: Seated – 220 Cocktails – 300 Wedding Reception – 120* Wedding Ceremony – 250
*Seasonal availability–call for details.
Grand Staircase Mezzanine
This three-story staircase and balcony—a stunning backdrop for photographs—features a mural by John White Alexander that covers almost 4,000 square feet of space.
Capacity: Cocktails – 150 Wedding Ceremony – 150 standing
Founders Room
The space where Andrew Carnegie once welcomed his guests to his museums, the Founders Room features an ornate high ceiling, hanging alabaster lamps, and a gorgeous fireplace.
Capacity: Seated – 40 Cocktails – 60 Theater-style – 60
Foster Overlook
This scenic mezzanine overlooks Carnegie Museum of Natural History’s Kamin Hall of Dinosaurs exhibition, which features the museum’s famed dinosaur collection.
Capacity: Seated – 60 Cocktails – 100
Hall of North American Wildlife
Turn your guests loose among black bears and jaguars in this iconic second-floor space. Features some of the continent’s most amazing animals in natural-habitat dioramas.
Capacity: Seated – 120 Cocktails – 150 Wedding Ceremony – 150*
*Subject to exhibit layout.
Hillman Hall and PaleoLab Lobby
This spacious lobby features a breathtaking display of mineral and gem specimens and includes access to the entire Hillman Hall of Minerals and Gems.
Capacity: Seated Dinner – 30 Cocktails – 100
Carnegie Museum of Art Theater
This theater space features a 14 x14-foot screen, wood-paneled walls, and a carpeted stage with lectern.
Capacity: Seating – 178
Food and beverage is provided by our on-site exclusive caterer, and we’re happy to work with you to plan your menu. See our current menus .
You can also call us at 412.622.3393 or email us .
Note: Carnegie Museums reserves the right to decline or cancel bookings because of concerns regarding property damage, safety risks, legal liability, and/or reputational harm to Carnegie Museums. Further, Carnegie Museums does not accept events hosted or sponsored by political action committees or other campaign-related organizations or aimed at promoting partisan political purposes, such as political fundraising or registering voters as members of a particular political party.