Make your wedding day truly distinctive at one of the four Carnegie Museums.
Celebrate your big day in the glorious Carnegie Music Hall Foyer, pose for photographs on the awe-inspiring Grand Staircase, and host your cocktail reception along the balcony above. Or take your wedding to Kamin Science Center along Pittsburgh’s scenic North Shore, where the new PointView Hall will provide stunning views of the Point and Pittsburgh’s three rivers. Or give your guests something to talk about with a reception at the The Andy Warhol Museum.
Tell us about your plans and let us get back to you with ideas. Complete an About my Event form .
Or contact us about your upcoming wedding:
For our Oakland Museums, call 412.622.3393 or email us .
For Kamin Science Center, call 412.237.1640 or e-mail us .
For The Andy Warhol Museum, call 412.237.3431 or email us .
Popular wedding spaces include:
Oakland Museums
Carnegie Music Hall Foyer
Grand Staircase Mezzanine
Hall of Architecture
Hall of Sculpture
Kamin Science Center
PointView Hall
Buhl Planetarium
Fourth Floor Overlook
The Andy Warhol Museum
First-Floor Entrance Lobby
Catering
We look forward to working with you to create the perfect catering package for your wedding day.
Carnegie Museums in Oakland: Wedding Catering Packages
Kamin Science Center: Wedding Catering Packages
FAQs
What all is included in the rental fee?
Tables/chairs, custodial services, limited technical services, entrance security, and someone from the special events office to oversee the event.
Things that are prohibited: Sparklers indoors/outdoors, bubbles, dropped/tossed flower petals, confetti indoors/outside, open-flame tapered candles, popcorn, balloons, and open flames.
In most cases, we ask that nothing be hung on the walls and signage be free-standing. But that depends on the venue. Just tell us what you have in mind.
What time does my event have to end?
In most cases, we ask that events end by 1 a.m. Let us know if this is a problem for you event.
Do you have a preferred catering list?
We partner with our exclusive caterer, Culinaire.
Can I bring in cookies for a wedding?
Yes! We love the Pittsburgh Cookie Table tradition.
Are linens included in fees?
Yes, they are included in our wedding package (but not in our other events packages).
Can I take pictures in Museum galleries?
You can absolutely take photographs in all event spaces. Museum gallery photography varies, however. Just ask us.
What about storage for my event?
All items that come into the museum must leave the same day.
Do you have any preferred vendors?
You are welcome to contract the florist and/or entertainment of your choice. We are happy to make recommendations, if needed.
Our museums have different parking operations, so please contact your event manager, who will be happy to share venue-specific information.
Can you suggest additional museum experiences for my guests?
Yes!  We can provide docent-led tours of galleries, live demonstrations, and other museum experiences for an additional fee.