This scenic North Shore venue offers incredible city and Point views, convenient parking, awesome exhibits, and cool ideas for truly individual events
PointView Hall and Terrace – Third Floor
With spectacular views of the Pittsburgh skyline, PointView Hall inside Kamin Science Center’s PPG SCIENCE PAVILION™ is a picture-perfect venue for wedding receptions, holiday parties, Bar/Bat Mitzvahs, corporate receptions, lectures, galas, fundraisers, and other festivities.
Capacity: Theater-style – 500 Cocktail reception – 500 Seated Dinner – 300 Wedding – 220
Science Stage – First Floor
Theater-style seating; equipped with a podium/microphone, large screen, projector, and theater lighting. Perfect for presentations or awards ceremonies.
Capacity: Seated – 300
Buhl Planetarium and Second Floor Exhibit Areas
This high-definition, full-dome experience will make your next event truly memorable. Bring a group in for a Buhl Planetarium show or add one to your special event. Get married under the stars, or hold a stellar awards ceremony!
Capacity: Fixed-Seated – 120* Seated Dinner – 50 Cocktail reception – 250
*Buhl Planetarium Theater
Works Theater and 4th-Floor Exhibits
We can mix up cool cocktails with liquid nitrogen or fire up the Van de Graff generator to literally make your hair stand on end. A fun, creative alternative for corporate dinners, holiday parties, rehearsal dinners, birthday parties, and bar & bat mitzvahs.
Capacity: Seated Dinner  – 50-120 Cocktail Reception  – 200 Theater Style – 100
Covestro Gallery – H2Oh!: Why Our Rivers Matter
Make a splash with your guests as you explore rivers, water conservation, and aquatic environments. Overlooking the Ohio River, this hands-on space offers stunning views.
Capacity: Cocktail Reception – 50
Full Building
Why not rent the entire main building? Includes all floors, all interactive exhibits, and you can even add a few shows and demonstrations. The sky’s the limit with a full building rental.
Capacity: Talk with us about your plans! Capacity varies based on the event.
Science Pavilion Classrooms A/B
From Birthday celebrations, showers, or corporate meetings, the PPG Science Pavilion Classrooms are the perfect space.
Capacity: Meeting – Up To 75
Food and beverage is provided by our on-site exclusive caterer, and we’ll work with you directly to plan your menu.
Things to know: Group Admission can be added on to any daytime room rental. Ample parking available. Your guests can pay on their own or you can host it for them. All event rentals include: Basic A/V, Tables/Chairs, Security, Custodial Services, and Event Supervision.
Tell us about your event and let us get back to you with ideas. Complete an About My Event form .
You can also call us at 412.237.3431 or e-mail us .
Note: Carnegie Museums reserves the right to decline or cancel bookings because of concerns regarding property damage, safety risks, legal liability, and/or reputational harm to Carnegie Museums. Further, Carnegie Museums does not accept events hosted or sponsored by political action committees or other campaign-related organizations or aimed at promoting partisan political purposes, such as political fundraising or registering voters as members of a particular political party.