Be a part of history! The Patrons of Carnegie Museums have a 130-year-old legacy of leadership giving. They trust the Carnegie Museums as places of unparalleled learning and connection.
All Patrons enjoy:
All standard Donors Circle benefits
Free museum admission and free unlimited educational films at Rangos Giant Cinema
Optional complimentary Family Gift Membership**
Recognition in our annual listing and on donor plaques prominently displayed at Carnegie Museums of Art and Natural History
Private docent-led tour for up to 12 people at any of the four Carnegie Museums
Invitation to a special viewing of a Rangos Giant Cinema film
Invitations to exclusive Donor and Patrons Circle events (behind-the-scenes encounters, conversations with curators, and more)
Personalized Services line: 412.622.5772
1895 Society
$1,895-$2,499
2 adults + 2 children + 8 guests
Monthly payment options available
Curators Society
$2,500-$4,999
2 adults + 2 children + 8 guests
Private event with a Museum Curator
Monthly payment options available
Directors Society
$5,000-$9,999
2 adults + 2 children + 8 guests
Private event with a Museum Director
All Curators Society benefits
Monthly payment options available
Presidents Society
$10,000-$24,999
2 adults + 2 children + 8 guests
Private event with the President
Free parking
All Directors Society benefits
Monthly payment options available
Carnegie Founders Society
$25,000 or more
2 adults + 2 children + 8 guests
Private museum visit with the President for you and four guests
All Presidents Society benefits
Monthly payment options available
How about giving the gift of membership? It’s a great way to share with others the fun and inspiration of the four Carnegie Museums. Give a gift membership .
Looking for a greater impact?
Join one of our museum giving societies or leave a bequest in your will.
Giving Societies
Strengthen your connection with the museums you love by joining one of our museum-specific giving societies.
A Gift for the Future
Create or update your will as a simple act of care to protect and support all you cherish, including Carnegie Museums.
** You may decline the Family-level Gift Membership for additional tax savings.
All Patrons Circle contributions have a fair market value at $395 per level. Includes optional benefit of a Complimentary Family level Membership to give to a friend (valued at $160).
Memberships are non-transferrable, non-refundable, and may not be shared by multiple households. All categories, benefits, and prices are subject to change at any time without notice. Guest passes may only be used when visiting with a member and cannot be shared outside of the members’ party.
Carnegie Museums is a registered 501(c)3 organization. A copy of the official registration and financial information for Carnegie Institute may be obtained at 1.800.732.0999. In compliance with IRS tax reporting laws, the amount of your charitable contribution is limited to the excess of your payment over the value of goods or services provided. For information on our privacy policy visit https://carnegiemuseums.org/privacy-policy.