Your generosity matters! Carnegie Museums is the region’s largest, most far-reaching cultural organization, with a legacy of scientific discovery, art exploration, and service to the community. A gift to Carnegie Museums is a gift to your community, including the 200,000 school kids inspired by our museums each year.
Donors enjoy more:
All standard membership benefits including free general admission to Carnegie Museum of Art, Carnegie Museum of Natural History, Kamin Science Center, and The Andy Warhol Museum
Exclusive events including member tours, exhibition previews, lectures, and receptions
Free reciprocal admission at 300+ ASTC museums and science centers, 275+ ROAM art museums and arboretums, plus 20+ major art and natural history museums
A select number of complimentary vouchers for educational films at Rangos Giant Cinema plus discounts on films (excludes Hollywood films)
Friend
$350–$499
2 adults + 2 children + 8 guests
10 free tickets for educational films at Rangos
Monthly payment options available
Guild
$500–$999
2 adults + 2 children + 8 guests
12 free tickets for educational films at Rangos
Private docent-led tour for up to 12 people at Carnegie Museum of Art, Carnegie Museum of Natural History, or The Andy Warhol Museum
Monthly payment options available
Benefactor
$1,000-$1,894
2 adults + 2 children + 8 guests
15 free tickets for educational films at Rangos
Private docent-led tour for up to 12 people at Carnegie Museum of Art, Carnegie Museum of Natural History, or The Andy Warhol Museum
Private USS Requin (SS 481) submarine tour for up to 8 people
Recognition in our annual listing and on donor plaques displayed at Carnegie Museums of Art and Natural History
Private film screening event at Rangos Giant Cinema
One complimentary Individual gift membership
How about giving the gift of membership? It’s a great way to share with others the fun and inspiration of the four Carnegie Museums. Give a gift membership .
Looking for another level of giving?
Inspire learning, bring world-class exhibitions to life, and share the joy of discovery with your gift to Carnegie Museums. Choose your giving level and make a difference now!
Patrons Circle
Join a group of patrons who are part of a 130-year-old legacy of making lasting impacts through exploration and discovery.
Giving Societies
Strengthen your connection with the museums you love by joining one of our museum-specific giving societies.
Memberships are non-transferrable, non-refundable, and may not be shared by multiple households. All categories, benefits, and prices are subject to change at any time without notice. Guest passes may only be used when visiting with a member and cannot be shared outside of the members’ party.
Carnegie Museums is a registered 501(c)3 organization. A copy of the official registration and financial information for Carnegie Institute may be obtained at 1.800.732.0999. Membership contributions have a fair market value in the following amounts: Friend ($195), Guild ($211), Benefactor ($310). In compliance with IRS tax reporting laws, the amount of your charitable contribution is limited to the excess of your payment over the value of goods or services provided. For information on our privacy policy visit https://carnegiemuseums.org/privacy-policy.