Late Seating at the Benedum Center
To ensure that all operagoers have a good experience, latecomers will be taken to the best available seat that does not disturb other patrons until intermission. Management accepts no responsibility for the inconvenience and can make no exceptions for late arrivals. Refunds or exchanges are NOT issued to latecomers.
Late Seating at other Venues
Late seating is handled on a show-by-show basis. Please note that for some of our shows at other venues, including at the Bitz Opera Factory, there is no late seating. When possible without disrupting the performance, Pittsburgh Opera will make every attempt to accommodate late arrivals. Management accepts no responsibility for the inconvenience and can make no exceptions for late arrivals. Refunds or exchanges are NOT issued to latecomers. Please allow ample travel time so that if you encounter unexpected traffic, road construction, accidents, full parking garages, etc., you are still able to arrive at the theater for the start of the performance.
Obstructed Vision at the Benedum Center
Supertitles, the English translations projected above the stage, will be fully visible to most Benedum Center customers. However, supertitles will not be visible to anyone seated in row W and behind on the Main Floor, or the side sections of rows W-ZZ on the Main Floor.
Emergency Information at the Benedum Center
An Emergency Register Book is located in the Benedum Center entrance lobby to the right of the entry doors. Refer emergency calls to 412-456-2610. Please turn off pagers, cell phones, and watches during the performance and notify your contact of the emergency number and your seat location. This theater is equipped with an Automated External Defibrillator.
Stage Area
Limited to performers, staff, and authorized visitors.
Fire Exits
Located at all levels and clearly marked. Use ONLY in case of emergency.
Lost and Found
Lost and Found at the Benedum: call Benedum Center Management Office at 412-456-2604, weekdays.
Lost & Found at the Byham: call 412-456-1377
Lost & Found at Calvary Episcopal Church or Pittsburgh Opera’s performance space (Bitz Opera Factory): call Pittsburgh Opera at 412-281-0912.
Cameras and Tape Recorders
The use of cameras, cell phones, and tape recorders in the auditorium is strictly prohibited.
Cast or Programming Changes
Cast and opera subject to change without notice. All ticket sales are final.