University in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, US
Former names
Former names
Carnegie Technical Schools (1900–1912) Carnegie Institute of Technology (1912–1967) Mellon Institute of Industrial Research (1913–1967)
Motto
"My heart is in the work" – Andrew Carnegie
Type
Private research university
Established
November 15, 1900 ; 124 years ago ( 1900-11-15 ) [ 1 ]
Founders
Accreditation
MSCHE
Academic affiliations
Academic affiliations
Endowment
$4.0 billion (2024) [ 2 ]
President
Farnam Jahanian
Provost
James Garrett
Academic staff
Academic staff
1,483 [ 3 ]
Students
16,676 (2024) [ 4 ]
Undergraduates
7,744 (2024) [ 4 ]
Postgraduates
8,932 (2024) [ 4 ]
Location
, United States 40°26′33″N 79°56′36″W ﻿ / ﻿ 40.44250°N 79.94333°W ﻿ / 40.44250; -79.94333
United States
Campus
Large city [ 6 ] , 157.2 acres (63.6 ha) [ 5 ]
Other campuses
Online
Newspaper
The Tartan
Colors
Red, black, steel gray, and iron gray [ 7 ] [ 8 ]
Nickname
Tartans
Sporting affiliations
Sporting affiliations
Mascot
Scotty the Scottish Terrier [ 10 ]
Website
cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University ( CMU ) is a private research university in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania, United States. The institution was established in 1900 by Andrew Carnegie as the Carnegie Technical Schools . In 1912, it became the Carnegie Institute of Technology and began granting four-year degrees. In 1967, it became Carnegie Mellon University through its merger with the Mellon Institute of Industrial Research , founded in 1913 by Andrew Mellon and Richard B. Mellon and formerly a part of the University of Pittsburgh . [ 11 ]
The university consists of seven colleges, including the College of Engineering , the School of Computer Science , the Dietrich College of Humanities and Social Sciences , and the Tepper School of Business . [ 12 ] The university has its main campus located 5 miles (8.0 km) from downtown Pittsburgh . It also has over a dozen degree-granting locations on six continents, including campuses in Qatar , Silicon Valley , and Kigali, Rwanda ( Carnegie Mellon University Africa ) and partnerships with universities nationally and globally. [ 13 ] Carnegie Mellon enrolls 15,818 students across its multiple campuses from 117 countries and employs more than 1,400 faculty members. [ 14 ] Carnegie Mellon is a member of the Association of American Universities and is classified among "R1: Doctoral Universities – Very high research activity". [ 15 ]
Carnegie Mellon competes in NCAA Division III athletics as a founding member of the University Athletic Association . Carnegie Mellon fields eight men's teams and nine women's teams as the Tartans. [ 16 ] The university's faculty and alumni include 21 Nobel Prize laureates and 13 Turing Award winners and have received 142 Emmy Awards , 64 Tony Awards , and 13 Academy Awards . [ 17 ]
The Carnegie Technical Schools were founded in 1900 in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania [ 18 ] by the Scottish-American industrialist and philanthropist Andrew Carnegie , who wrote "My heart is in the work", when he donated the funds to create the institution. Carnegie's vision was to open a vocational training school for the sons and daughters of working-class Pittsburghers, many of whom worked in his mills. Carnegie was inspired for the design of his school by the Pratt Institute in Brooklyn, New York , founded by industrialist Charles Pratt in 1887. [ 19 ] In 1912, the institution changed its name to Carnegie Institute of Technology (CIT) and began offering four-year degrees. During this time, CIT consisted of four constituent schools: the School of Fine and Applied Arts, the School of Apprentices and Journeymen, the School of Science and Technology, and the Margaret Morrison Carnegie School for Women .
The Mellon Institute of Industrial Research was founded in 1913 by banker and industrialist brothers Andrew Mellon (who went on to become U.S. Treasury Secretary ) and Richard B. Mellon in honor of their father, Thomas Mellon , patriarch of the Mellon family . The Institute began as a research organization that performed contract work for government and industry, initially as a department within the University of Pittsburgh . In 1927, the Mellon Institute was incorporated as an independent nonprofit. In 1937, the Mellon Institute's iconic building was completed on Fifth Avenue. [ 20 ]
In 1967, with support from Paul Mellon , the Carnegie Institute of Technology merged with the Mellon Institute of Industrial Research to become Carnegie Mellon University. In 1973, Carnegie Mellon's coordinate women's college , the Margaret Morrison Carnegie College, merged its academic programs with the rest of the university. [ 21 ] The industrial research mission of the Mellon Institute survived the merger as the Carnegie Mellon Research Institute (CMRI) and continued doing work on contract to industry and government. In 2001, CMRI's programs were subsumed by other parts of the university or spun off into autonomous entities. [ 22 ]
During the 1970s and 1980s, the tenure of president Richard Cyert (1972–1990) witnessed a period of growth and development. The research budget grew from roughly $12 million annually in the early 1970s to more than $110 million in the late 1980s. Researchers in new fields like robotics and software engineering helped the university to build its reputation. One example was the introduction of the " Andrew " computing network in the mid-1980s. This project linking all computers and workstations on campus set the standard for educational computing and established Carnegie Mellon as a technology leader in education and research. On April 24, 1985, cmu.edu , Carnegie Mellon's Internet domain, became one of the first six .edu domain names.
In the 1990s and into the 2000s, Carnegie Mellon solidified its status among American universities, consistently ranking in the top 25 in the national U.S. News & World Report rankings, and in the top 30 (ranking 28th in 2022) amongst universities worldwide. [ 23 ] [ 24 ] Carnegie Mellon is distinct in its interdisciplinary approach to research and education. Through the establishment of programs and centers outside the limitations of departments or colleges, the university has established leadership in fields such as computational finance , information systems , cognitive sciences , management, arts management, product design, behavioral economics , energy science and economics, human–computer interaction , entertainment technology , and decision science .
On April 15, 1997, Jared L. Cohon , former dean of the Yale School of Forestry & Environmental Studies , was elected president by Carnegie Mellon's board of trustees. During Cohon's presidency, Carnegie Mellon continued its trajectory of innovation and growth. His strategic plan aimed to leverage the university's strengths to benefit society in the areas of biotechnology and life sciences , information and security technology, environmental science and practices, the fine arts and humanities , and business and public policy . In 2006, following negotiations between President Cohon and South Australian Premier Mike Rann , CMU opened a campus of the Heinz College in the historic Torrens Building in Adelaide , Australia. President Cohon's term ended on June 30, 2013, after which he returned to the faculty at Carnegie Mellon.
On July 1, 2003, Carnegie Mellon launched "Insp!re Innovation", a $1 billion comprehensive fundraising campaign. Half of the campaign goal is intended for the endowment to provide long-lasting support for faculty, students and breakthrough innovations. The campaign brought in a total of $1.19 billion, with $578.5 million going toward Carnegie Mellon's endowment. It also enabled the university to establish 31 endowed professorships, 97 endowed fellowships and 250 endowed scholarships. [ 25 ]
On September 7, 2011, William S. Dietrich II , the former chairman of Dietrich Industries, Inc., a subsidiary of Worthington Industries , Inc., pledged a gift of $265 million, effective on October 6, 2011, upon his death. In response to this gift, Carnegie Mellon renamed the College of Humanities and Social Sciences as the Marianna Brown Dietrich College of Humanities and Social Sciences after William Dietrich's mother. [ 26 ]
On April 23, 2012, New York's Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg and New York University 's President John Sexton announced an agreement between New York City, New York's MTA, and a consortium of academic institutions, and private technology companies that led to the creation in New York of a Center for Urban Science and Progress (CUSP), an applied science research institute composed of a partnership of institutions from around the globe, led by New York University with a consortium of universities including Carnegie Mellon, the University of Warwick , the City University of New York , the Indian Institute of Technology Bombay , and the University of Toronto .
On February 5, 2013, Carnegie Mellon announced the selection of Subra Suresh , Director of the National Science Foundation and Dean of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology School of Engineering , as its ninth president effective July 1, 2013. [ 27 ] Suresh stepped down in June 2017 [ 28 ] and was replaced by Farnam Jahanian , the university's interim-president and former provost, in March 2018. [ 29 ]
On October 30, 2019, Carnegie Mellon publicly announced the launch of "Make Possible: The Campaign for Carnegie Mellon University", a campaign which seeks to raise $2 billion to advance the university's priorities, including campus development. [ 30 ]
On September 8, 2022, Carnegie Mellon announced a $275.7 million partnership with the Mastercard Foundation to support Carnegie Mellon University Africa in Kigali, Rwanda . Carnegie Mellon's Kigali campus provides graduate-level study in engineering and artificial intelligence.
On November 6, 2023, Carnegie Mellon Trustee Ray Lane and his wife Stephanie Lane invested $25 million in support of the university's Computational Biology department. [ 31 ]
Carnegie Mellon's 157.2 acre (63 ha) main campus is five miles (8 km) from downtown Pittsburgh , between Schenley Park and the neighborhoods of Squirrel Hill , Shadyside , and Oakland . [ 5 ] Carnegie Mellon is bordered to the west by the campus of the University of Pittsburgh . Carnegie Mellon owns 81 buildings in the Oakland and Squirrel Hill neighborhoods of Pittsburgh.
For decades, the center of student life on campus was Skibo Hall, the university's student union. Built in the 1950s, Skibo Hall's design was typical of mid-century modern architecture but was poorly equipped to deal with advances in computer and internet connectivity. The original Skibo Hall was razed in the summer of 1994 and replaced by a new student union that is fully Wi-Fi enabled. Known as the University Center, the building was dedicated in 1996. In 2014, Carnegie Mellon re-dedicated the University Center as the Cohon University Center in recognition of the eighth president of the university, Jared Cohon . [ 32 ]
A large grassy area known as "The Cut" forms the backbone of the campus, with a separate grassy area known as "The Mall" running perpendicular. The Cut was formed by filling in a ravine (hence the name) with soil from a nearby hill that was leveled to build the College of Fine Arts building.
The northwestern part of the campus (home to Hamburg Hall, Newell-Simon Hall, Smith Hall, and Gates Hillman Complex) was acquired from the United States Bureau of Mines in the 1980s.
Carnegie Mellon has been purchasing 100% renewable energy for its electricity since 2011. [ 33 ] [ additional citation(s) needed ]
A panoramic view of Carnegie Mellon University's Pittsburgh campus from the College of Fine Arts Lawn.
From left to right: College of Fine Arts, Hunt Library, Baker and Porter Hall, Hamerschlag Hall,
's Cathedral of Learning (in the background), Wean Hall and Doherty Hall, Purnell Center, and the Cohon University Center. Also visible are "The Fence", and the
sculpture.
The campus began to take shape in the Beaux-Arts architecture style of George Carnegie Palmer and Henry Hornbostel of Palmer & Hornbostel, winners of the 1904 competition to design the original institution and later the founder of the Carnegie Mellon School of Architecture . [ 34 ] Most buildings around the university's main campus were originally roofed with green Ludowici Spanish tile. [ 35 ]
There was little change to the campus between the first and second World War . A 1938 master plan by Githens and Keally suggested acquisition of new land along Forbes Avenue , but the plan was not fully implemented. The period starting with the construction of the Hall of the Arts building (former home of the Graduate School of Industrial Administration) in 1952 and ending with Wean Hall in 1971 saw the institutional change from Carnegie Institute of Technology to Carnegie Mellon University. Around this time an expanding student population demanded improved facilities for student life, athletics and libraries. The campus expanded to Forbes Avenue from its original land along Schenley Park .
The buildings of this era reflected contemporary architectural styles. The International Style , with its rejection of historical tradition and its emphases on functionalism and expression of structure, had been in vogue in European settings since the 1930s. It came late to the Carnegie Mellon campus because of the hiatus in building activity and a general reluctance among American universities to abandon historical styles. By the 1960s, the International Style was adopted to accomplish needed expansion quickly and affordably with the swelling of student ranks in the aftermath of the GI Bill in 1944. Each building was a unique architectural statement that may have acknowledged the existing campus in its placement, but not in its form or materials.
Starting in the 1990s the university built a new university center (Cohon University Center), theater and drama building (Purnell Center for the Arts), business school building ( Tepper School of Business ), and several dormitories.
Baker Hall was renovated in the early 2000s, and new chemistry labs were established in Doherty Hall soon after. Several computer science buildings, such as Newell-Simon Hall , also were established, renovated or renamed in the early 2000s.
In 2006, Carnegie Mellon Trustee Jill Gansman Kraus donated the 80-foot (24 m)-tall sculpture Walking to the Sky , which was placed on the lawn facing Forbes Avenue between the Cohon University Center and Warner Hall. The sculpture was controversial for its placement, the general lack of input from the campus community, and its (lack of) aesthetic appeal. [ 37 ]
The Gates Hillman Complex opened for occupancy on August 7, 2009. [ 38 ] It sits on a 5.6-acre (2.3 ha) site on the university's West Campus, surrounded by Cyert Hall, the Purnell Center for the Arts, Doherty Hall, Newell-Simon Hall, Smith Hall, Hamburg Hall , and the Robert Mehrabian Collaborative Innovation Center. It contains 318 offices as well as labs, computer clusters , lecture halls, classrooms and a 255-seat auditorium. The Gates Hillman Complex was made possible by a $20 million lead gift from the Gates Foundation and an additional $10 million grant from the Henry L. Hillman Foundation . The Gates Hillman Complex and the Purnell Center for the Arts are connected by the Randy Pausch Memorial Footbridge. [ 39 ]
In September 2012, Carnegie Mellon announced the construction of the Sherman and Joyce Bowie Scott Hall on the Pittsburgh campus. The building is situated between Hamerschlag Hall, Roberts Hall, and Wean Hall and houses the Wilton E. Scott Institute for Energy Innovation, Bertucci Nanotechnology Lab, Engineering Research Accelerator (formerly known as the Institute for Complex Engineered Systems), Disruptive Health Technologies Institute, and the Department of Biomedical Engineering. [ 40 ] In November 2013, Carnegie Mellon announced a $67 million gift from David Tepper , who previously donated $56 million, to develop the Tepper Quadrangle on the north campus. The Tepper Quad includes a new Tepper School of Business facility across Forbes Avenue from a renovated and expanded Hamburg Hall (home to Heinz College) [ 41 ] as well as other university-wide buildings and a welcome center to serve as a public gateway to the university. [ 42 ]
In April 2015, Carnegie Mellon, in collaboration with Jones Lang LaSalle , announced the planning of a second office space structure, alongside the Robert Mehrabian Collaborative Innovation Center, an upscale and full-service hotel, and retail and dining development along Forbes Avenue. This complex will connect to the Tepper Quadrangle, the Heinz College, the Tata Consultancy Services Building, and the Gates-Hillman Center to create an innovation corridor on the university campus. The effort is intended to continue to attract major corporate partnerships to create opportunities for research, teaching, and employment with students and faculty. [ 43 ]
Alongside the Tepper Quad and Hamburg Hall, Carnegie Mellon finished construction in 2020 on TCS Hall, an innovation center made possible with a $35 million gift from Tata Consultancy Services . [ 44 ] Carnegie Mellon announced plans to collaborate with Emerald Cloud Lab to construct the world's first cloud lab in a university setting. The Carnegie Mellon University Cloud Lab was planned to be completed by the spring of 2023. Carnegie Mellon also planned to construct a new mechanical engineering building by fall 2023 (Scaife Hall), a new $105 million athletics center by fall 2024 (Highmark Center for Health, Wellness and Athletics), a $210 million Science Futures Building (R.K. Mellon Hall of Sciences) by 2026, [ 45 ] as well as a Robotics Innovation Center at Hazelwood Green, along with new dormitories and other buildings. [ 46 ]
On April 12, 2024, Carnegie Mellon broke ground for construction of its new Richard King Mellon Hall of Sciences, a 338,900 square-foot addition to its campus. [ 47 ]
The College of Engineering includes seven engineering departments ( Biomedical Engineering , Chemical Engineering , Civil and Environmental Engineering , Electrical and Computer Engineering , Engineering and Public Policy , Mechanical Engineering , and Materials Science and Engineering ), two interdisciplinary institutes (the Information Networking Institute and the Integrated Innovation Institute ), and the Engineering Research Accelerator.
The College of Fine Arts is one of the oldest colleges of fine arts in the United States, and today it is a federation of five distinct schools: The School of Architecture , The School of Music , The School of Design , The School of Drama , and The School of Art . [ 48 ] [ 49 ] [ 50 ] The college shares research projects, interdisciplinary centers and educational programs with other units across the university. [ 51 ] The College of Fine Arts runs master's programs in Arts Management and Entertainment Industry Management with the Heinz College, as well as interdisciplinary undergraduate programs with the Dietrich College of Humanities and Social Sciences (BHA), Mellon College of Science (BSA), the School of Computer Science (BCSA), and the College of Engineering (BESA). [ 52 ]
The Dietrich College of Humanities and Social Sciences is the university's liberal arts college and emphasizes the study of the human condition through rigorous analysis and technology. Departments include English , History , Modern Languages , Philosophy , Psychology , Social and Decision Sciences , and Statistics as well as an Institute for Politics and Strategy. The college also offers undergraduate degree programs in Information Systems , Economics (jointly with the Tepper School of Business), and the Bachelor of Humanities and Arts (BHA) with the College of Fine Arts . [ 53 ]
The H. John Heinz III College of Information Systems and Public Policy offers top-ranked master's degrees in Public Policy and Management, Health Care Policy and Management, Medical Management, Public Management , Information Systems and Management, Information Technology, and Information Security Policy and Management. The Heinz College also runs master's programs in Arts Management and Entertainment Industry Management with the College of Fine Arts. Heinz College consists of the School of Information Systems & Management and the School of Public Policy & Management. It also offers several PhD and executive education programs.
The Mellon College of Science has four departments: Biological Sciences , Chemistry , Mathematical Sciences , and Physics . The college is expanding efforts in neuroscience , green chemistry , bioinformatics , computational biology , nanotechnology , computational finance , cosmology, sensor research, and biological physics. It also offers an undergraduate Bachelor of Science and Arts (BSA) degree in conjunction with the College of Fine Arts . [ 54 ]
The School of Computer Science : Carnegie Mellon helped define, and continually redefines, the field of computer science . The School of Computer Science is recognized internationally as one of the top schools for computer science [ 55 ] and has been consistently ranked the best in the country. The School of Computer Science includes seven departments: the Computer Science Department, Ray and Stephanie Lane Computational Biology Department , Robotics Institute , Machine Learning Department, the Human–Computer Interaction Institute , the Language Technologies Institute , and the  Software and Societal Systems Department (S3D). It additionally offers the undergraduate Bachelor of Computer Science and Arts (BCSA) degree in conjunction with the College of Fine Arts . [ 56 ]
The Tepper School of Business (formerly the Graduate School of Industrial Administration) offers undergraduate programs in Business Administration and Economics (the latter jointly with the Dietrich College), master's degrees in Business Administration ( MBA ), Product Management (MSPM) and joint degrees in Computational Finance (MSCF) with the Dietrich College of Humanities and Social Sciences, the Mellon College of Science, the Heinz College, and the School of Computer Science. In addition, joint degrees are offered with Civil and Environmental Engineering and the Heinz College. The Tepper School also offers doctoral degrees in several areas and presents a number of executive education programs. Following a $67 million donation from alumnus David A. Tepper in 2013, the university expanded the undergraduate business program and named the school after him. In summer of 2015, a new curriculum was formally instated. [ 57 ]
In addition to research and academic institutions, the university hosts several other educationally driven programs. The Pennsylvania Governor's School for the Sciences , a state-funded summer program that aims to foster interest in science amongst gifted high school students is run on campus every summer. The university also runs Carnegie Mellon Pre-College , a six-week residential program for rising juniors and seniors in high school and the Summer Academy for Math and Science (SAMS), a free-of-charge STEM immersion program for students from underrepresented backgrounds. The Cyert Center for Early Education is a child care center for Carnegie Mellon faculty and staff, as well as an observational setting for students in child development courses. Carnegie Mellon also developed the Open Learning Initiative which provides free courses online in a variety of fields to students globally.
Carnegie Mellon also runs the Integrative Design, Arts, and Technology (IDeATe) Network to provide university-wide arts and technology education to students from every college. IDeATe allows students to take minors or concentrations in Animation and Special Effects, Entrepreneurship for Creative Industries, Game Design, Intelligent Environments, Learning Media, Media Design, Physical Computing, and Sound Design. IDeAte will also offer graduate master's degrees in Emerging Media, Game Design, Integrative Innovation for Products and Services, Computational Data Science, Urban Design, and Production Technology and Management. IDeATe also manages the Entertainment Technology Center (ETC) in conjunction with the School of Computer Science and the College of Fine Arts. Each master's degree program has an option to study in the CMU Integrative Media Program (IMP) at Steiner Studios in New York City . IDeATe Network will be based on the Pittsburgh campus upon the development of recently acquired property on Forbes Avenue west of Junction Hollow . [ 58 ]
2023 U.S. News & World Report Graduate Rankings [ 67 ]
Biological Sciences
37
Business
16
Business-Business Analytics
2
Business-Information Systems
2
Business-Production/Operations
2
Business-Project Management
5
Business-Supply Chain/Logistics
6
Chemistry
42
Computer Science
2
Computer Science-Artificial Intelligence
1
Computer Science-Programming Language
1
Computer Science-Systems
2
Computer Science-Theory
4
Earth Sciences
81
Economics
21
Engineering
4
Engineering-Computer
4
Engineering-Civil
7
Engineering-Electrical/Electronic/Communications
8
Engineering-Environmental/Environmental Health
8
Engineering-Mechanical
10
Engineering-Materials
12
English
41
Fine Arts
7
Fine Arts-Time-Based/New Media
1
History
43
Mathematics
21
Mathematics-Discrete Mathematics and Combinatorics
4
Mathematics-Applied Math
12
Physics
32
Public Affairs
12
Public Affairs-Information Technology and Management
1
Public Affairs-Environmental Policy and Management
5
Public Affairs-Public Policy Analysis
8
Public Affairs-Urban Policy
12
Psychology
23
Psychology-Cognitive
2
Statistics
5
Nationally, U.S. News & World Report placed Carnegie Mellon in a tie with Washington University in St. Louis and the University of Michigan for 21st place among American research universities in their 2024-2025 rankings. [ 68 ] Many of its graduate programs have been ranked in national and international surveys. In 2022, U.S. News ranked Carnegie Mellon as having 23 graduate programs in the Top 10 nationwide and 16 in the Top 5 nationwide., [ 69 ] including three programs ranked first: Artificial Intelligence, Programming Languages, and Information and Technology Management. In particular, the CMU School of Computer Science has been consistently ranked the best in the nation, tied with MIT , Stanford , and UC Berkeley . [ 70 ]
Globally, Carnegie Mellon is ranked 28th by Times Higher Education and 52nd by QS World University Rankings .
Carnegie Mellon was named one of the "New Ivies " by Newsweek . [ 71 ] In 2010, The Wall Street Journal ranked Carnegie Mellon 1st in computer science, 4th in finance, 10th overall, and 21st in engineering according to job recruiters. [ 72 ] Carnegie Mellon ranks thirteenth among "Best Colleges By Salary Potential (Bachelor's Only)" in the United States according to PayScale 's 2016–17 study. [ 73 ] In 2024, Carnegie Mellon's Tepper School of Business placed 9th in an annual ranking of U.S. business schools by Bloomberg Businessweek . [ 74 ]
In 2016, The Hollywood Reporter ranked the School of Drama 3rd in the world among undergraduate drama schools. [ 75 ] In 2015, the same publication ranked the MFA program at the School of Drama 5th in the world. [ 76 ]
Carnegie Mellon's Dietrich College of Humanities and Social Sciences was ranked 55th for social sciences and 60th for humanities in the world by Times Higher Education for 2020. [ 77 ] [ 78 ] Dietrich College is also ranked 20th for social sciences among Shanghai Jiao Tong University's world's top 100 universities. [ 79 ]
Carnegie Mellon is one of 66 elected members of the Association of American Universities and one of 29 members (one of 13 American members) of the World Economic Forum Global University Leaders Forum . [ 80 ]
2023 [ 81 ]
2022 [ 82 ]
2021 [ 83 ]
2020 [ 84 ]
2019 [ 85 ]
2018 [ 86 ]
2017 [ 87 ]
2016 [ 88 ]
Applicants
33,707
34,261
32,896
26,189
27,634
24,351
20,497
21,189
Admits
3,873
4,447
4,524
4,267
4,170
4,550
4,601
Admit rate
11%
11.30%
13.52%
17.27%
15.44%
17.12%
22.20%
21.71%
Enrolled
1,736
1,896
1,637
1,585
1,572
1,676
1,552
Yield
45%
45%
42.64%
36.18%
37.15%
37.70%
36.68%
33.73%
U.S. News & World Report rates admission to Carnegie Mellon as "most selective". [ 89 ] For the class of 2026 (enrolling in fall 2022), Carnegie Mellon received 34,261 applications and admitted approximately 3,873 (11%), with 1,736 enrolling. [ 90 ] The acceptance rates of the individual colleges and programs range from Carnegie Mellon School of Architecture 's 30% to Carnegie Mellon School of Drama 's 3%. [ 91 ] The largest college, in terms of the class of 2025 enrollment, is the College of Engineering with 499 students, followed by the Dietrich College of Humanities and Social Sciences with 391, and the Mellon College of Science with 266. [ 92 ] The smallest college is the School of Design, with 34. [ 91 ] The middle 50% range of SAT scores of enrolled freshmen was 720-770 for reading and writing, and 770-800 for math, while the middle 50% range of the ACT composite score was 34–35. [ 93 ] The university is need-blind for domestic applicants. [ 94 ] The class of 2026 enrolled students from 46 U.S. states and 42 countries. [ 91 ] Undergraduate tuition for 2023-2024 is $62,260, and room and board is $17,468. [ 95 ]
CMU is classified among "R1: Doctoral Universities – Very High Research Activity". [ 15 ] For the 2021 fiscal year, the university spent $402 million on research. The primary recipients of this funding were the School of Computer Science ($100.3 million), the Software Engineering Institute ($71.7 million), the College of Engineering ($48.5 million), and the Mellon College of Science ($47.7 million). The research money comes largely from federal sources, with a federal investment of $234.9 million in 2021. The federal agencies that invest the most money include the National Science Foundation and the Department of Defense , which contributed $70.5 million and $90.4 million in 2021, respectively. [ 96 ]
The recognition of Carnegie Mellon as one of the best research facilities in the nation has a long history. As early as the 1987 federal budget, CMU was ranked as third in the amount of federal research funds received with $41.5 million, with only MIT and Johns Hopkins receiving more research funds from the Department of Defense. [ 97 ]
The Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center (PSC) is a joint effort between Carnegie Mellon, University of Pittsburgh , and Westinghouse Electric Company . PSC was founded in 1986 by its two scientific directors, Ralph Roskies of the University of Pittsburgh and Michael Levine of Carnegie Mellon. PSC is a leading partner in the TeraGrid , the National Science Foundation's cyberinfrastructure program. [ 98 ]
The Neuroscience Institute (NI) is a university-wide research institute that was founded in 2018 [ 99 ] [ 100 ] [ 101 ] as a successor to an earlier effort, known as Brainhub. [ 102 ] [ 103 ] Combining research in computer science , engineering , machine learning , statistics , and cognitive science with basic neuroscience , NI aims to promote research that will improve the human condition. Devices developed by the institute have been designed to enable communication for locked-in patients, [ 104 ] treatments for Parkinson's disease , [ 105 ] improved brain imaging technology using artificial intelligence , [ 106 ] and electrodes that work with coarse, curly hair. [ 107 ] NI  includes over 30 faculty and 100 trainees from four colleges and oversees two PhD programs (the Program in Neural Computation and the Program in Systems Neuroscience) that have received support from the National Institutes of Health . [ 108 ] [ 109 ] Numerous philanthropic gifts help support NI research. [ 110 ] [ 111 ] [ 112 ] [ 113 ] NI also provides direct administrative and monetary support for the Center for Neural Basis of Cognition, a long-running collaboration with the University of Pittsburgh . [ 114 ] [ 115 ]
The Robotics Institute (RI) is a division of the School of Computer Science and considered to be one of the leading centers of robotics research in the world. The Field Robotics Center (FRC) has developed a number of significant robots, including Sandstorm and H1ghlander , which finished second and third in the DARPA Grand Challenge , and Boss, which won the DARPA Urban Challenge . The Robotics Institute has partnered with a spinoff company, Astrobotic Technology Inc. , to land a CMU robot on the moon by 2016 in pursuit of the Google Lunar XPrize. The robot, known as Andy, is designed to explore lunar pits, which might include entrances to caves. [ 116 ] The RI is primarily sited at Carnegie Mellon's main campus in Newell-Simon hall. [ 117 ]
The Software Engineering Institute (SEI) is a federally funded research and development center sponsored by the U.S. Department of Defense and operated by Carnegie Mellon, with offices in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA and Arlington, Virginia. The SEI publishes books on software engineering for industry, government and military applications and practices. The organization is known for its Capability Maturity Model [ 118 ] [ 119 ] (CMM) and Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI), which identify essential elements of effective system and software engineering processes and can be used to rate the level of an organization's capability for producing quality systems. The SEI is also the home of CERT/CC , the federally funded computer security organization. The CERT Program's primary goals are to support secure requirements and development of computer systems and ensure that appropriate technology and systems management practices are used to resist attacks on networked systems and to limit damage and ensure continuity of critical services subsequent to attacks, accidents, or failures. [ 120 ]
The Human–Computer Interaction Institute (HCII) is a division of the School of Computer Science and is considered one of the leading centers of human–computer interaction research, integrating computer science, design, social science, and learning science. [ 121 ] Such interdisciplinary collaboration is the hallmark of research done throughout the university.
The Language Technologies Institute (LTI) is another unit of the School of Computer Science and is famous for being one of the leading research centers in the area of language technologies . The primary research focus of the institute is on machine translation , speech recognition , speech synthesis , information retrieval , parsing and information extraction . [ 122 ] Until 1996, the institute existed as the Center for Machine Translation that was established in 1986. From 1996 onwards, it started awarding graduate degrees and the name was changed to Language Technologies Institute.
The Ray and Stephanie Lane Computational Biology Department , one of the seven departments in the School of Computer Science , was established in 2007 (as Lane Center for Computational Biology), officially became a department within the School of Computer Science in 2009, and named the Ray and Stephanie Lane Computational Biology Department in 2023. The department is the leader in developing computational methodologies to advance biomedical research.
Carnegie Mellon is also home to the Carnegie School of management and economics. This intellectual school grew out of the Tepper School of Business in the 1950s and 1960s and focused on the intersection of behavioralistm and management. Several management theories, most notably bounded rationality and the behavioral theory of the firm , were established by Carnegie School management scientists and economists.
Carnegie Mellon also develops cross-disciplinary and university-wide institutes and initiatives to take advantage of strengths in various colleges and departments and develop solutions in critical social and technical problems. To date, these have included the Cylab Security and Privacy Institute , the Wilton E. Scott Institute for Energy Innovation, the Neuroscience Institute , the Simon Initiative, and the Disruptive Healthcare Technology Institute.
Carnegie Mellon has made a concerted effort to attract corporate research labs, offices, and partnerships to the Pittsburgh campus. Apple Inc. , Intel , Google , Microsoft , Disney , Facebook , IBM , General Motors , Bombardier Inc. , Yahoo! , Uber , Tata Consultancy Services , Ansys , Boeing , Robert Bosch GmbH , and the Rand Corporation have established a presence on or near campus. In collaboration with Intel, Carnegie Mellon has pioneered research into claytronics . [ 123 ]
International activities
In addition to its Pittsburgh campus, Carnegie Mellon has a branch campus in the Middle East, Carnegie Mellon University in Qatar , which offers a full undergraduate curriculum with degree programs in computer science, business administration, biology, computational biology, and information systems. The campus is located in Doha 's Education City which is home to multiple other U.S. universities all of which are funded by the Qatar Foundation . The Qatari campus has been the subject of controversy, as Islamic cultural values and laws in Qatar differ greatly from the core values of Carnegie Mellon. [ 124 ] Additionally, Carnegie Mellon and other U.S. universities in Education City have been criticized for being essentially complicit in Qatar's corruption, connections with Hamas and their questionable human rights record by continuing to operate there. [ 124 ] [ 125 ] [ 126 ] [ 127 ]
It also has graduate-level extension campuses in Mountain View, California in the heart of Silicon Valley (offering masters programs in Software Engineering and Software Management). The Tepper School of Business maintains a satellite center in downtown Manhattan and the Heinz College maintains one in Adelaide , Australia. The Heinz College , the Institute for Politics and Strategy, and the Department of Engineering and Public Policy host centers in Washington, D.C. as part of degree programs, research, and government affairs initiatives as well as being a part of the University of California, Washington Center . Carnegie Mellon also established the Integrative Media Program at Steiner Studios in Brooklyn , New York. Carnegie Mellon also maintains the Carnegie Mellon Los Angeles Center in North Hollywood, California where students in the Master of Entertainment Industry Management program are required to relocate to Los Angeles in their second year and attend classes at this facility.
Carnegie Mellon's Information Networking Institute offers graduate programs in Athens, Greece and Kobe, Japan , in collaboration with Athens Information Technology and the Hyogo Institute of Information Education Foundation, respectively. In the fall of 2007, the cities of Aveiro and Lisbon , Portugal were added to the Information Networking Institute 's remote locations. The  Software and Societal Systems Department (S3D) offers graduate programs in Coimbra , Portugal. The Entertainment Technology Center offers graduate programs in Portugal, Japan, and Singapore. The Human–Computer Interaction Institute offers a master's degree in conjunction with the University of Madeira , in Portugal at the jointly founded Madeira Interactive Technologies Institute . The College of Engineering has an international location in Kigali, Rwanda offering the Master of Science in Information Technology and the Master of Science in Electrical and Computer Engineering.
The Libraries of Carnegie Mellon include Hunt Library, the Roger Sorrells Engineering & Science Library, the Mellon Institute Library, the Posner Center, and the Qatar Library. Additionally, the Libraries' Million Book Project (2001–2008) sparked development of the Universal Digital Library . The university libraries host a number of full text special collections for public access, including the Andrew Carnegie Collection, Herbert A. Simon Collection, Allen Newell Collection, the H. John Heinz III Collection, the Pittsburgh Jewish Newspapers Project, and the Posner Memorial Collection. Carnegie Mellon students and faculty have access to the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh and some University of Pittsburgh libraries through consortial agreements with those institutions. The Hunt Institute for Botanical Documentation (HIBD), [ 128 ] dedicated as the Rachel McMasters Miller Hunt Botanical Library in 1961, has been a research division of CMU since its founding. The HIBD is an international bibliographical research and service in the fields of botany, horticulture, and the history of the plant sciences and has a significant research library and art holdings on the 5th floor of Hunt Library. The university's Software Engineering Institute also houses a research library.
Carnegie Mellon also manages the Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps in Pittsburgh on which students throughout Pittsburgh's universities rely. Carnegie Mellon partners with the University of Pittsburgh to provide opportunities in Army Reserve Officers' Training Corps and Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps to its students.
Carnegie Mellon is accredited by the Middle States Commission on Higher Education . [ 129 ]
Collaboration with the University of Pittsburgh
Carnegie Mellon neighbors the campus of the University of Pittsburgh , and in some cases, buildings of the two universities are intermingled. This helps to facilitate myriad academic and research collaborations between the two schools, [ 130 ] including such projects as the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center , the Pittsburgh Life Sciences Greenhouse , the Immune Modeling Center, the Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition, the University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute , as well as the National Science Foundation-supported Pittsburgh Science of Learning Center. [ 131 ] [ 132 ] Further, the universities also offer multiple dual and joint degree programs such as the Medical Scientist Training Program , the Molecular Biophysics and Structural Biology Graduate Program, the Joint CMU-Pitt Ph.D. Program in Computational Biology , the Center for Neural Basis of Cognition , and the Law and Business Administration program. Some professors hold joint professorships between the two schools, and students at each university may take classes at the other (with appropriate approvals). [ 133 ] CMU students and faculty also have access to the University of Pittsburgh library system, as well as the Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh . The two universities also co-host academic conferences, such as the 2012 Second Language Research Forum. [ 134 ] In 2015, in conjunction with the University of Pittsburgh and UPMC , Carnegie Mellon became a partner of the Pittsburgh Health Data Alliance to leverage data analysis in health care. [ 135 ]
Discoveries and innovation
Computer and applied sciences
Alice (software) – freeware (for non-commercial purposes) object-based educational programming language with an integrated development environment (IDE). [ 136 ]
Andrew Project – distributed computing environment developed at Carnegie Mellon beginning in 1982. It was an ambitious project for its time and resulted in an unprecedentedly vast and accessible university computing infrastructure. The goal was to have connected 3M computer workstations. [ 137 ]
Artificial intelligence – Several of the first AI software programs were created at Carnegie Mellon. These include the Logic Theorist , General Problem Solver , and Soar .
Autonomous vehicle – Navlab , the first autonomous car program was developed by Carnegie Mellon. Since then, H1ghlander and Sandstorm autonomous vehicles were developed at Carnegie Mellon and placed 3rd and 2nd in the DARPA Grand Challenge and Carnegie Mellon's Boss won the DARPA Grand Challenge (2007) . [ 138 ] The university continues to be a leader in autonomous research and development.
Dynamic random-access memory – In 1966, Robert H. Dennard invented the one-transistor memory cell consisting of a transistor and a capacitor for which a patent was issued in 1968. It became the basis for today's dynamic random-access memory (DRAM).
MEMS – Harvey C. Nathanson invented the first MEMS (micro-electro-mechanical systems) device of the type now found in products ranging from iPhones to automobiles. Typical MEMS devices include the accelerometers found in smartphones and video game controllers, and the gyroscopes used in automobiles and wearables.
Xerox PARC – Founded in 1969 by George Pake and Jack Goldman, Xerox PARC has been at the heart of numerous revolutionary computer developments as laser printing, Ethernet, the modern personal computer, graphical user interface (GUI) and desktop paradigm, object-oriented programming, ubiquitous computing, electronic paper, amorphous silicon (a-Si) applications, the computer mouse, and advancing very-large-scale integration (VLSI) for semiconductors.
BLISS – system programming language developed at Carnegie Mellon by W. A. Wulf , D. B. Russell , and A. N. Habermann around 1970. It was perhaps the best known systems programming language until C made its debut in 1972. [ 139 ]
Emoticon – The first true emoticon was developed at Carnegie Mellon by Scott Fahlman in 1982.
Hashtag – In a 2007 tweet, Chris Messina proposed vertical/associational grouping of messages, trends, and events on Twitter by the means of hashtags.
Java – class-based object oriented programming language that was originally developed by James Gosling at Sun Microsystems (which has since been acquired by Oracle ) and released in 1995 as a core component of Sun Microsystems' Java platform.
Mach (kernel) – Richard Rashid and Avie Tevanian developed Mach at Carnegie Mellon from 1985 to 1994, ending with Mach 3.0, which is a true microkernel . Mach was developed as a replacement for the kernel in the BSD version of Unix , so no new operating system would have to be designed around it. Experimental research on Mach appears to have ended, although Mach and its derivatives exist within a number of commercial operating systems.  These include NeXTSTEP and OPENSTEP , upon which macOS and iOS are based. [ 140 ]
Wi-Fi network – Alex Hills created the first wi-fi network using a local area network (LAN) on the Carnegie Mellon campus in 1993. [ 141 ] [ 142 ]
Companies and entrepreneurship
The Swartz Center for Entrepreneurship acts as Carnegie Mellon's startup accelerator . Jim Swartz, co-founder of Accel Partners , pledged $31 Million to establish a hub for university wide entrepreneurial activities. His gift is the fifth largest Carnegie Mellon has received. In 2016, the center opened providing a business incubator and makerspace . [ 143 ] The center employs Entrepreneurs-in-Residence who mentor founders of early stage companies consisting of students, faculty, and alumni. [ 144 ] Startups work on their ideas throughout the year culminating at an annual Demo Day where they showcase their company to the public. [ 145 ]
Carnegie Mellon's alumni, faculty, and staff have founded many notable companies, some of which are shown below. [ 146 ] [ 147 ]
Activision Blizzard , 1979 (as Activision ), founding CEO Jim Levy (B.S., M.S.)
Adobe Systems , 1982, co-founder Charles Geschke (Ph.D.)
Sun Microsystems , 1982, co-founders Vinod Khosla (M.S.) and Andy Bechtolsheim (M.S.)
Accel Partners , 1983, co-founder Jim Swartz (M.S.)
NeXT , 1985, co-founding VP Engineering Avie Tevanian (M.S., Ph.D.)
Transarc , 1989, co-founders Alfred Spector (Professor), Jeffrey Eppinger (B.S., M.S., Ph.D.), Mike Kazar (Ph.D.), Dean Thompson (B.S.)
FORE Systems , 1990, co-founders Francois Bitz (B.S., M.S.), Onat Menzilcioglu (M.S., Ph.D.), Robert Sansom (Ph.D.) and Eric C. Cooper (Professor)
Microsoft Research , 1991, founder Richard Rashid (Professor)
IDEO , 1991, founder David M. Kelley (B.S.)
Appaloosa Management , 1993, founder David Tepper (M.B.A)
Red Hat , 1993, co-founder Marc Ewing (B.S.)
Cognizant , 1994, co-founder Francisco D'Souza (M.B.A)
Juniper Networks , 1996, founder Pradeep Sindhu (Ph.D.)
Symphony Technology Group , 2002, founder Romesh Wadhwani (Ph.D.)
Astrobotic Technology , 2007, founder Red Whittaker (M.S., Ph.D., Professor)
Google X , 2010, co-founders Sebastian Thrun (Professor), Yoky Matsuoka (Professor), and Astro Teller (Ph.D.)
Nest , 2010, co-founder Matt Rogers (B.S., M.S.)
Duolingo , 2011, founders Luis von Ahn (Ph.D., Professor) & Severin Hacker (Ph.D.)
Coursera , 2012, founder Andrew Ng (B.S.)
Defense Innovation Unit , 2015, founder Maynard Holliday (B.S.)
Argo AI , 2016, co-founder Peter Rander (M.S., Ph.D.)
Nuro , 2016, co-founder Dave Ferguson (M.S., Ph.D.)
Aurora Innovation , 2017, co-founder Chris Urmson (Ph.D.)
Carnegie Mellon's student life includes over 400 student organizations, art galleries, and various unique traditions. Student organizations provide social, service, media, academic, spiritual, recreational, sport, religious, political, cultural, and governance opportunities. Carnegie Mellon's campus houses several galleries such as The Frame , a student-devoted gallery, and the Regina Gouger Miller Gallery , an art gallery that specializes in contemporary professional artists. The Carnegie Mellon School of Music , Carnegie Mellon School of Drama , and the student-run theatrical organization Scotch'n'Soda provides campus with a variety of performance arts events. The university has a strong Scottish motif inspired by Andrew Carnegie's Scottish heritage, as well as the Mellon family's Scots-Irish ancestry. Examples include Scotty, the Scottish Terrier mascot, The Tartan student newspaper, Skibo Gymnasium, The Thistle yearbook, and the Céilidh weekend every fall semester for homecoming. [ 149 ]
Carnegie Mellon offers conventional housing for its students through single-gender, coresidential, and special interest options. Students can choose from a variety of housing options. The four options for students are traditional, semi-suite, suite, and apartments. The Traditional is a typical college dormitory setting, a long hallway with a series of 1-3 person rooms and a community bathroom shared with an entire floor or wing. Semi-Suite offers more privacy through 1-4 person rooms with 3-5 residents sharing one semi-private bathroom. Suite is similar to Semi-Suite but contains additional bedrooms, a bathroom, and living room/lounge area shared with 3-8 other residents. Apartments are shared between 1-3 people and may contain additional bedrooms, a semi-private bathroom, a living room, and kitchen shared with the other residents. Upperclassmen have additional options for housing, which include town houses and a larger variety of one or two bedroom apartments. [ 150 ] There are 27 residential buildings on campus and even more off campus. [ 151 ]
First-year students are assigned to the dedicated first-year residence halls on campus including Morewood E-Tower, Morewood Gardens, Residence on Fifth, Shirley Apartments, as well as Boss, Donner, Hamerschlag, McGill, Mudge, Scobell, and Stever Houses. Approximately one-third of upperclassmen choose to continue living on campus through university housing. Options for upperclassmen include Fifth & Clyde, Morewood Gardens, West Wing, Doherty, Fairfax, Margaret Morrison, Fifth Neville, Shady Oak, Shirley, Forbes & Beeler, and Woodlawn Apartments as well as Henderson, Resnik, Roselawn, Spirit, Tech, Webster, and Welch Houses. [ 152 ]
Fraternities and sororities
The Greek tradition at Carnegie Mellon began over 100 years ago with the founding of the first fraternity on campus, Theta Xi , in 1912. [ 153 ]
Specialized communities
In 2022, Welch House began to host the specialized Queer community, a living community suited to the needs of non-binary students by allowing students to "live in the same room with any other student inclusive of sex assigned at birth, gender identity, gender expression, and/or sexual orientation". [ 154 ] Welch House consists of semi-suite singles and doubles. In addition, Stever House hosts an all-gender floor for students who would prefer a traditional double.
Spirit House is a residential community for upperclassmen designated for members of the SPIRIT student organization, a Black Student Union that serves as a haven for Black students within the Carnegie Mellon community and champions issues facing the Black community. [ 155 ]
In the early days of Carnegie Tech, there was a single bridge connecting Margaret Morrison Women's College with the Carnegie Institute of Technology. The bridge was a meeting place for students. In 1916, the bridge was taken down and the university filled in the area. The administration built a wooden fence as a new meeting place. The students did not understand why anyone would want to meet at a fence. The administration was about to give up and tear it down, but that night a fraternity, as a prank, painted the entire fence advertising a fraternity party. Ever since, painting the Fence has been a Carnegie Mellon tradition. [ 156 ] The Fence at Carnegie Mellon lies at the center of campus, in the area known as "the Cut". Students guard the fence 24 hours a day, and, as long as two vigils are maintained, no other student may "take" the fence. The fence can then be painted by the group that has it, but only between midnight and 6 am. Only hand brushes may be used; the use of spray paint or paint rollers is considered vandalism and results in a fine. The previous paint cannot be stripped, and each new painting adds a new layer. The original wooden fence finally collapsed in the 1990s due to the weight from over 1' of surrounding paint, and was immediately replaced with an identical one manufactured from concrete. Today the fence is considered "the world's most painted object" by the Guinness Book of World Records . [ 157 ]
The Carnegie Mellon Tartans were a founding member of the University Athletic Association of NCAA Division III . Prior to World War II, Carnegie Mellon (as Carnegie Tech) played with what are now classified as NCAA Division I teams. In 1936, the Carnegie Tech riflery team won the national intercollegiate championship. [ 158 ] The Carnegie Tech men's basketball team was a member of the Eastern Intercollegiate Conference throughout the conference's existence from 1932 to 1939 [ 159 ] and won the conference championship in 1936, defeating Pittsburgh in a conference championship playoff game. [ 160 ]
Varsity teams are fielded in basketball, track, cross country, football, golf, soccer, swimming and diving, volleyball, tennis, and softball. In addition, club teams exist in ultimate frisbee , [ 161 ] rowing , [ 162 ] rugby , lacrosse, hockey, [ 163 ] baseball, [ 164 ] softball, skiing & snowboarding , [ 165 ] soccer, volleyball, water polo, [ 166 ] and cycling. [ 167 ] Carnegie Mellon Athletics runs a comprehensive and popular intramural system, maintains facilities (primarily Skibo Gymnasium, Cohon University Center, Gesling Stadium, and the future Highmark Center for Health, Wellness and Athletics), and offers courses to students in fitness and sports. Carnegie Mellon's primary athletic rivals are fellow UAA schools Case Western Reserve University and Washington University in St. Louis ; the Tartans had an especially intense rivalry with the latter's football team from the 2000s to 2017.
On November 28, 1926, the 6–2 Carnegie Technical Institute football team shut out the undefeated Notre Dame Fighting Irish 19–0 at Forbes Field . Knute Rockne , the coach of the Irish at the time, was so confident that the Irish would defeat "tiny Carnegie Tech" that he decided to skip the game and travel to Chicago to watch the Army-Navy football game for scouting purposes. It was only later that he found out by telegram that the Irish had suffered their first loss of the season. ESPN compared the upset to the Appalachian State victory over the University of Michigan in 2007. [ 168 ] The game was ranked the fourth-greatest upset in college football history by ESPN . [ 169 ]
Since 2025, the Tartans play in the Centennial Conference at the NCAA Division III level. The head coach of the football team is Ryan Larsen , who was the Presidents' Athletic Conference coach of the year in 2022.  Prior to losing in the Sweet 16 of the 2022 D3 playoffs, the Tartans held a 17-game win streak which was, at the time, the longest win streak across all NCAA divisions in football.
Track and cross country
In recent years, the varsity track and cross country programs have seen outstanding success on the Division III national level. The men's cross country team has finished in the top 15 in the nation each of the last three years, and has boasted several individual All-Americans . The men's track team has also boasted several individual All-Americans spanning sprinting, distance, and field disciplines. Recent All-Americans from the track team are Bram Miller (2021), Tommy Vandenberg (2014–2015), Brian Harvey (2007–2009), Davey Quinn (2007), Nik Bonaddio (2004, 2005), Mark Davis (2004, 2005), Russel Verbofsky (2004, 2005) and Kiley Williams. [ 170 ] Carolyn Lowe (10,000 meters 1992) is the only track athlete to win an NCAA Division III championship.
With much of the team's support, Lauren Schmidt received the NCAA Pennsylvania Woman of the Year award (2003), was a two-time All-American (2001 and 2002), a four-time All-University Athletic Association selection (1999–2002), and the conference's Player of the Year (2001). [ 171 ]
Students can participate in any level of competition across multiple sports including wiffle ball , dodgeball , basketball , flag football , ultimate frisbee and many more. [ 172 ]
There are more than 117,000 Carnegie Mellon alumni worldwide with the graduating class of 2022. [ 173 ] Alumni and current/former faculty include 21 Nobel laureates , six members of the National Academy of Medicine , 22 members of the National Academy of Sciences , 72 members of the National Academy of Engineering , two MacArthur Fellows , 24 Guggenheim Fellows , seven Packard fellows , 142 Emmy Award recipients (including ten time recipient Steven Bochco ), 12 Academy Award recipients, 52 Tony Award recipients, two winners of the Stockholm Prize in Criminology , and 13 Turing Award recipients. [ 174 ]
Alumni in the fine arts include artists Andy Warhol , Cote de Pablo , Philip Pearlstein , [ 175 ] John Currin , [ 176 ] Shalom Neuman , [ 177 ] Jonathan Borofsky [ 178 ] and Burton Morris ; [ 179 ] authors John-Michael Tebelak and Kurt Vonnegut ; Screenwriter Michael Goldenberg ; television series creator, Steven Bochco , [ 180 ] actors René Auberjonois , Katy Mixon , Holly Hunter , Matt Bomer , and Zachary Quinto , children's author E.L. Konigsberg , David Edward Byrd , Broadway actress Amanda Jane Cooper , [ 181 ] Rock and Broadway Theater Poster Artist and graphic designer; [ 182 ] Indian film actor Sushma Seth , Boston Pops conductor Keith Lockhart , mountaineer and author Aron Ralston , and architect Mao Yisheng .
Alumni in the sciences include Charles Geschke , co-founder and chairman of Adobe Systems ; [ 183 ] Stephanie Kwolek , inventor of Kevlar ; James Gosling , creator of the Java programming language, Andy Bechtolsheim , co-founder of Sun Microsystems ; David Kelley , co-founder of IDEO ; George Pake , founder of Xerox PARC ; Marc Ewing , co-founder of Red Hat ; Jim Levy , founding CEO of Activision ; billionaire hedge fund investor and owner of the Carolina Panthers of the National Football League David Tepper ; Scott Fahlman , creator of the emoticon ; Chris Messina , creator of the hashtag ; tech executive and entrepreneur Kai-Fu Lee ; and astronauts Edgar Mitchell ( Apollo 14 ) and Judith Resnik , who perished in the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster. [ 184 ] John Forbes Nash , a 1948 graduate and winner of the 1994 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics , was the subject of the book and subsequent film A Beautiful Mind . Alan Perlis , a 1943 graduate, was a pioneer in programming languages and recipient of the first Turing Award.
Alumni in politics include U.S. Representatives Susie Lee and Sydney Kamlager-Dove , Puerto Rican politician Carmen Yulín Cruz , Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago President Charles L. Evans , Allegheny County Executive Rich Fitzgerald , and former General Motors CEO and Secretary of Defense , Charles Erwin Wilson .
The campus of Carnegie Mellon in Pittsburgh has served as the locale for many motion pictures. Alumnus George A. Romero filmed Creepshow (1982) in and around Margaret Morrison Carnegie Hall. [ 185 ] Much of the on-campus scenes in the 2000 film Wonder Boys , starring Michael Douglas and Tobey Maguire , were filmed in Carnegie Mellon's campus. [ 186 ] Other movies filmed at Carnegie Mellon include The Mothman Prophecies , Dogma , Lorenzo's Oil , Hoffa , The Dark Knight Rises , Where'd You Go, Bernadette , and Flashdance . The university is also featured prominently in the films Smart People , Monkey Shines , and in the anime Summer Wars .
The musical Pippin was originally conceived by Stephen Schwartz as a student musical performed by the Scotch'n'Soda student theatre troupe. [ 187 ] Schwartz also collaborated with drama student John-Michael Tebelak to expand his master's thesis project titled Godspell , created under the direction of Lawrence Carra , into a musical. [ 188 ]
While enrolled at Carnegie Mellon, acting students Michael McKean and David Lander (class of 1969) created the characters "Lenny and Squiggy". [ 189 ] The pair continued performing the characters in live comedy routines before joining the cast of the TV series Laverne & Shirley .
In 2008, Carnegie Mellon professor Randy Pausch 's " Last Lecture " became a pop culture phenomenon. Based on a lecture he gave in September 2007 – shortly after he learned his cancer had metastasized – his book quickly rose to the top of bestseller lists around the country. Named in Time magazine's Time 100 list of influential people, he died in July 2008 from pancreatic cancer. [ 190 ]
In 2003, Carnegie Mellon established the Robot Hall of Fame in partnership with the Carnegie Science Center .
The 68th Tony Awards in 2014 announced Carnegie Mellon as its first educational partner in jointly awarding the "Tony Honor for Excellence in Theatre Education", which will "honor kindergarten through high school (K-12) theatre educators". [ 191 ]
^ Other consists of Multiracial Americans & those who prefer to not say.
^ The percentage of students who received an income-based federal Pell grant intended for low-income students.
^ The percentage of students who are a part of the American middle class at the bare minimum.
^ "CMU Facts" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on July 14, 2023 . Retrieved June 3, 2023 .
^ "U.S. and Canadian 2024 NCSE Participating Institutions Listed by Fiscal Year 2024 Endowment Market Value, Change in Market Value from FY23 to FY24, and FY24 Endowment Market Values Per Full-time Equivalent Student" (XLSX) . National Association of College and University Business Officers (NACUBO). February 12, 2025. Archived from the original on February 12, 2025 . Retrieved February 12, 2025 .
^ "CMU Fact Sheet" (PDF) . Carnegie Mellon University. January 2022. Archived (PDF) from the original on January 22, 2023.
^ a b c "Enrollment – Institutional Research and Analysis – Office of Institutional Effectiveness and Planning - Carnegie Mellon University" . Carnegie Mellon University Institutional Research and Analysis. Archived from the original on January 4, 2022 . Retrieved January 4, 2022 .
^ a b "Carnegie Mellon 2020–2021 Financial Report" (PDF) . Carnegie Mellon Annual Financial Report 2021 . Archived (PDF) from the original on January 4, 2022 . Retrieved January 4, 2022 .
^ "IPEDS-Carnegie Mellon University" . Archived from the original on November 7, 2021 . Retrieved November 7, 2021 .
^ "The CMU Brand – Brand Guidelines" . Archived from the original on August 3, 2021 . Retrieved August 3, 2021 .
^ "The CMU Brand – Core Colors" . Archived from the original on August 3, 2021 . Retrieved August 3, 2021 .
^ "2015–2016 Undergraduate Catalog: Department of Athletics and Physical Education" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on October 13, 2015 . Retrieved October 15, 2015 .
^ "Carnegie Mellon's Mascot" . Archived from the original on May 3, 2009 . Retrieved September 20, 2009 .
^ "History – CMU" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on September 3, 2018 . Retrieved September 4, 2018 .
^ "Academics – CMU" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on September 4, 2018 . Retrieved September 4, 2018 .
^ "Carnegie Mellon University's Global Presence" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on March 15, 2023.
^ "University Information – Institutional Research and Analysis" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on March 7, 2022 . Retrieved January 4, 2022 .
^ a b "Carnegie Classifications - Institution Profile" . Indiana University Center for Postsecondary Research. Archived from the original on July 27, 2020 . Retrieved March 30, 2020 .
^ "Carnegie Mellon University Athletics" . Carnegie Mellon University Athletics . Archived from the original on August 12, 2023 . Retrieved August 13, 2023 .
^ "Awards – CMU" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on September 9, 2016 . Retrieved January 5, 2022 .
^ Committee on Education, United States House of Prepresentatives (1920). Charges Against the Federal Board for Vocational Education, Volume 3 . Washington: Government Printing Office. Archived from the original on August 18, 2021 . Retrieved June 25, 2015 .
^ "The Pratt Institute: Model for Pittsburg School of Technology" . Boston Evening Transcript . January 16, 1902. Archived from the original on May 12, 2016 – via Google News Archive Search.
^ "Mellon Institute at Carnegie Mellon University National Historic Chemical Landmark" . American Chemical Society . Archived from the original on November 14, 2017 . Retrieved July 16, 2019 .
^ "History of MMCC" . carnegiemellontoday.com. Archived from the original on February 21, 2009 . Retrieved February 15, 2008 .
^ Carpenter, Mackenzie (April 1, 2001). "CMU closing its Carnegie Mellon Research Institute" . post-gazette.com. Archived from the original on October 4, 2013.
^ World's Best Universities; Top 400 Universities in the World Archived September 6, 2013, at the Wayback Machine . US News. Retrieved on July 17, 2013.
^ QS World University Rankings – 2012 Archived September 13, 2012, at the Wayback Machine . Top Universities (December 19, 2012). Retrieved on July 17, 2013.
^ Inspire Innovation: About the Campaign – Carnegie Mellon Web Site. Archived November 30, 2009, at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved September 11, 2011.
^ "Bill Dietrich & Carnegie Mellon University" . Archived from the original on February 25, 2020 . Retrieved September 7, 2011 .
^ "Retrieved February 5, 2013" . Carnegie Mellon University. February 5, 2013. Archived from the original on December 15, 2014 . Retrieved June 19, 2014 .
^ "Suresh To Step Down as President of Carnegie Mellon University - News" . Carnegie Mellon University. June 1, 2017. Archived from the original on September 4, 2018 . Retrieved September 4, 2018 .
^ "Farnam Jahanian Named President of Carnegie Mellon University - News" . Carnegie Mellon University. March 8, 2018. Archived from the original on March 21, 2018 . Retrieved September 4, 2018 .
^ "Carnegie Mellon University Announces Landmark $2 Billion Campaign - News" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022 . Retrieved January 4, 2022 .
^ "Carnegie Mellon Trustee Ray Lane and Stephanie Lane Invest $25 Million in CMU's Computational Biology Department" . Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved May 6, 2024 .
^ "CMU student center to be renamed for Cohon" . Pittsburgh Post-Gazette . March 24, 2014. Archived from the original on March 26, 2014.
^ "Energy Mix – Environment at CMU" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on May 18, 2021 . Retrieved February 4, 2022 .
^ "Carnegie Prizes Come Here: Palmer & Hornbostel Win Competition for Architects of Technical Schools" Archived May 2, 2022, at the Wayback Machine . The New York Times . October 27, 1904. p. 1. Retrieved March 29, 2022.
^ "In General" . The Brickbuilder . Vol. 15, no. 2. 1906. p. 43.
^ "Randy Pausch's Last Lecture: Really Achieving Your Childhood Dreams" (PDF) . Randy Pausch. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 13, 2008 . Retrieved May 7, 2008 .
^ "The Tartan reflects on the people and events of 2005–2006" . The Tartan. 2006. Archived from the original on January 14, 2009 . Retrieved January 7, 2009 .
^ "The Gates Hillman Prediction Market - Overview" . February 8, 2011. Archived from the original on February 8, 2011 . Retrieved November 30, 2023 . {{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link )
^ "The Top 200 World Universities" . Times Higher Education . Archived from the original on January 15, 2008 . Retrieved February 18, 2008 .
^ "Retrieved September 20, 2012" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on June 25, 2014 . Retrieved June 19, 2014 .
^ "Heinz Endowments Gift" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on December 13, 2013 . Retrieved December 12, 2013 .
^ "Retrieved November 15, 2013" . Carnegie Mellon University. November 14, 2013. Archived from the original on March 20, 2016 . Retrieved June 19, 2014 .
^ Belko, Mark (2015). "CMU proposes hotel, office, retail complex to help remake Forbes Avenue" . The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette . Archived from the original on April 24, 2015 . Retrieved April 23, 2015 .
^ "Retrieved August 25, 2015" . Carnegie Mellon University. August 25, 2015. Archived from the original on August 28, 2015 . Retrieved August 25, 2015 .
^ "Building For the Future" . Science Connection . July 30, 2021. Archived from the original on January 4, 2022 . Retrieved January 4, 2022 .
^ "CMU, Richard King Mellon Foundation Announce Partnership for New Robotics Center at Hazelwood Green" . Carnegie Mellon School of Computer Science . Archived from the original on January 6, 2022 . Retrieved January 6, 2022 .
^ "Carnegie Mellon Breaks Ground for Richard King Mellon Hall of Sciences" . Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved May 6, 2024 .
^ "Transfer Students" . Undergraduate Admission Requirements . School of Drama. July 31, 2016. Archived from the original on February 8, 2011.
^ "Regular Decision & Transfer" . Undergraduate Admissions . School of Architecture. July 31, 2016. Archived from the original on July 9, 2016.
^ "Transfer Applications" . Application Instructions & Timeline . School of Design. July 31, 2016. Archived from the original on August 7, 2016.
^ "BXA Intercollege Degree Programs" . CMU College of Fine Arts . July 31, 2016. Archived from the original on August 7, 2016.
^ "BXA Intercollege Degree Programs – The Programs" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on October 2, 2017 . Retrieved February 7, 2018 .
^ "BXA Intercollege Degree Programs – BHA Program" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on February 7, 2018 . Retrieved February 7, 2018 .
^ "BXA Intercollege Degree Programs – BSA Program" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on February 7, 2018 . Retrieved February 7, 2018 .
^ "America's Best Graduate Schools 2009" . U.S. News & World Report . Archived from the original on October 11, 2007 . Retrieved March 28, 2008 .
^ "BXA Intercollege Degree Programs – BCSA Program" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on February 7, 2018 . Retrieved February 7, 2018 .
^ "UBA Curriculum Change" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on September 25, 2015.
^ "Integrative Design, Arts, and Technology" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on January 17, 2014 . Retrieved January 17, 2014 .
^ "America's Top Colleges 2025" . Forbes . September 6, 2025 . Retrieved October 3, 2025 .
^ "2025-2026 Best National Universities Rankings" . U.S. News & World Report . September 23, 2025 . Retrieved October 3, 2025 .
^ "2024 National University Rankings" . Washington Monthly . August 25, 2024 . Retrieved August 29, 2024 .
^ "2025 Best Colleges in the U.S." The Wall Street Journal /College Pulse . September 4, 2025 . Retrieved October 3, 2025 .
^ "2024 Academic Ranking of World Universities" . ShanghaiRanking Consultancy. August 15, 2024 . Retrieved August 21, 2024 .
^ "QS World University Rankings 2026" . Quacquarelli Symonds . June 19, 2025 . Retrieved June 19, 2025 .
^ "World University Rankings 2025" . Times Higher Education . October 9, 2024 . Retrieved June 19, 2025 .
^ "2025-2026 Best Global Universities Rankings" . U.S. News & World Report . June 17, 2025 . Retrieved June 17, 2025 .
^ "CMU's Graduate School Rankings" . U.S. News & World Report . March 29, 2022. Archived from the original on May 15, 2019 . Retrieved May 5, 2024 .
^ "US News | Best National University Rankings (2025)" . Archived from the original on December 23, 2019 . Retrieved September 24, 2024 .
^ "U.S. News & World Report Ranks 23 Carnegie Mellon Graduate Programs in Top Ten Nationwide" . Carnegie Mellon University. March 29, 2022. Archived from the original on April 1, 2022 . Retrieved March 29, 2022 .
^ "US News | Best Computer Science Schools" . Archived from the original on November 26, 2018 . Retrieved June 9, 2024 .
^ "America's 25 New Elite Ivies " . Newsweek . August 21, 2006. Archived from the original on July 14, 2011 . Retrieved August 21, 2010 .
^ "The Top 25 Recruiter Picks" . The Wall Street Journal . September 13, 2010. Archived from the original on December 26, 2014 . Retrieved August 3, 2017 .
^ "Best Universities and Colleges" . Payscale . Archived from the original on December 23, 2016 . Retrieved December 20, 2016 .
^ "Best Business Schools 2018 US Rankings" . Bloomberg Businessweek . Archived from the original on April 16, 2019 . Retrieved October 7, 2019 .
^ "The Top 25 Undergraduate Drama Schools Ranked" . The Hollywood Reporter . May 20, 2016. Archived from the original on May 23, 2016 . Retrieved June 2, 2014 .
^ Appelo, Tim (May 29, 2015). "The 25 Best Drama Schools for a Master of Fine Arts" . The Hollywood Reporter . Archived from the original on May 30, 2015 . Retrieved May 29, 2015 .
^ "Subject Ranking 2020: Social Sciences" . Times Higher Education . October 29, 2019. Archived from the original on December 10, 2019 . Retrieved December 23, 2019 .
^ "Subject Ranking 2020: Arts and Humanities" . Times Higher Education . September 24, 2019. Archived from the original on December 10, 2019 . Retrieved December 23, 2019 .
^ "Rankings" . Carnegie Mellon University . Archived from the original on November 29, 2019 . Retrieved April 13, 2016 .
^ "Global University Leaders Forum 2015 Members List" (PDF) . World Economic Forum. Archived (PDF) from the original on September 6, 2015 . Retrieved August 11, 2015 .
^ University, Carnegie Mellon (August 22, 2023). "CMU President Jahanian Welcomes the Class of 2027+ - News - Carnegie Mellon University" . www.cmu.edu . Archived from the original on September 16, 2024 . Retrieved September 16, 2024 .
^ University, Carnegie Mellon (August 22, 2022). "CMU President Welcomes Class of 2026+ - News - Carnegie Mellon University" . www.cmu.edu . Archived from the original on August 22, 2022 . Retrieved August 22, 2022 .
^ "Fall 2020 First-year Admission Rates" (PDF) . Carnegie Mellon University Institutional Research and Analysis. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 4, 2021 . Retrieved January 4, 2022 .
^ "Common Data Set 2020-2021 - Institutional Research and Analysis" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on January 20, 2022 . Retrieved March 7, 2021 .
^ "Common Data Set 2019-2020 - Institutional Research and Analysis" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020 . Retrieved March 7, 2021 .
^ "Common Data Set 2018-2019 - Institutional Research and Analysis" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on November 11, 2020 . Retrieved March 7, 2021 .
^ "Common Data Set 2017-2018 - Institutional Research and Analysis" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on October 11, 2018 . Retrieved March 7, 2021 .
^ "Common Data Set 2016-2017 - Institutional Research and Analysis" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on May 18, 2021 . Retrieved March 7, 2021 .
^ "Carnegie Mellon University" . U.S. News & World Report Best Colleges . Archived from the original on February 27, 2017 . Retrieved January 4, 2022 .
^ "Undergraduate Admission - Institutional Research and Analysis" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on January 4, 2022 . Retrieved January 4, 2022 .
^ a b c "General Fact Sheet" (PDF) . Carnegie Mellon Undergraduate Admissions . Archived from the original (PDF) on December 12, 2019 . Retrieved December 12, 2019 .
^ "Fall 2021 First-year, First-time, Full-time Enrollment by Race/Citizenship" (PDF) . Carnegie Mellon Institutional Research and Analysis . Archived (PDF) from the original on January 4, 2022 . Retrieved January 4, 2022 .
^ University, Carnegie Mellon. "Common Data Set 2021-2022 - Institutional Research and Analysis - Office of Institutional Effectiveness and Planning - Carnegie Mellon University" . www.cmu.edu . Archived from the original on January 5, 2023 . Retrieved January 5, 2023 .
^ "Financial Aid & Affordability" . Carnegie Mellon University. May 20, 2021. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021 . Retrieved May 3, 2023 .
^ University, Carnegie Mellon. "2023-2024 Undergraduate Tuition - Student Financial Services - Office of Enrollment Management - Carnegie Mellon University" . www.cmu.edu . Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved August 13, 2023 .
^ "NSF – NCSES Academic Institution Profiles – Carnegie Mellon U. : Federally funded R&D expenditures, by federal agency: 2020–11" . ncsesdata.nsf.gov . Archived from the original on July 31, 2022 . Retrieved May 29, 2022 .
^ "CMU Is Third in Defense Contracts" . Pittsburgh Post-Gazette . May 25, 1988. Archived from the original on May 5, 2016 . Retrieved November 5, 2015 – via Google News Archive.
^ "Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center" . Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center . Archived from the original on February 8, 2008 . Retrieved February 18, 2008 .
^ "New Neuroscience Institute at CMU" . Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved November 11, 2022 .
^ "Barbara Shinn-Cunningham To Lead Carnegie Mellon's New Neuroscience Institute" . Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved November 12, 2022 .
^ "CMU also announces Neuroscience Institute" . March 2018 . Retrieved November 12, 2022 .
^ "Carnegie Mellon Launches $75 Million Brain Research Initiative" . Philanthropy News Digest . September 2, 2014. Archived from the original on March 31, 2017 . Retrieved November 12, 2022 .
^ "CMU Researchers Are Teaching Computers To Read Minds" . July 3, 2017. Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved November 12, 2022 .
^ "Australian man uses brain implant to send texts from his iPad" . November 12, 2022. Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved August 10, 2023 .
^ "Deep-brain stimulation (DBS) prolonging effect, Carnegie Mellon University, Aryn Gittis" . www.neurotechreports.com . Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved August 10, 2023 .
^ "Advancing dynamic brain imaging with AI" . ScienceDaily .
^ "New electrodes better capture brain waves of people with natural hair | Science News" . March 11, 2020.
^ "Training in Computational Neuroscience: From Biology to Model and Back Again" . Archived from the original on August 16, 2023 . Retrieved November 12, 2022 .
^ "Training Program in Big Data Systems Neuroscience" . Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved November 12, 2022 .
^ "Carnegie Mellon, Richard King Mellon Foundation Announce Historic Partnership to Accelerate CMU's Science and Technology Leadership and the Transformation of Hazelwood Green" . May 20, 2021. Archived from the original on December 6, 2022 . Retrieved November 12, 2022 .
^ "Carnegie Mellon awarded $10 million for science building, neuroscience" . Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved November 12, 2022 .
^ "Carnegie Mellon Receives $10 Million for Future of Science Initiative" . September 14, 2021. Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved November 12, 2022 .
^ "Three New Trustees Elected to CMU Board" . November 9, 2021. Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved November 12, 2022 .
^ "Carnegie Mellon University Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition" . Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved November 12, 2022 .
^ "Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition Celebrates 20 Years" . September 18, 2014 . Retrieved November 12, 2022 – via YouTube.
^ "Carnegie Mellon Lunar Rover Wows XPRIZE Judges, Wins First Milestone Prize for Development Toward Flight Readiness – Carnegie Mellon School of Computer Science" . December 16, 2014. Archived from the original on October 20, 2016 . Retrieved October 20, 2016 .
^ "Robotics Institute" . Robotics Institute . Archived from the original on October 24, 2007 . Retrieved February 18, 2008 .
^ Mark C. Paulk; Bill Curtis; Mary Beth Chrissis; Charles V. Weber (July 1993). "Capability maturity model, version 1.1". IEEE Software . 10 (4). IEEE : 18– 27. doi : 10.1109/52.219617 .
^ Mark C. Paulk; Charles V. Weber; Bill Curtis; Mary Beth Chrissis (January 1, 1994). The Capability Maturity Model: Guidelines for Improving the Software Process (1st ed.). Addison-Wesley Professional . ISBN 978-0-201-54664-4 .
^ "Software Engineering Institute" . sei.cmu.edu. Archived from the original on December 3, 2009 . Retrieved February 16, 2008 .
^ "Welcome to the Human–Computer Interaction Institute" . Human–Computer Interaction Institute . Archived from the original on May 9, 2008 . Retrieved February 18, 2008 .
^ "CMU/Language Technologies Institute" . Language Technologies Institute . Archived from the original on December 16, 2008 . Retrieved December 24, 2008 .
^ "The Claytronics Project – Collaborative Research in Programmable Matter Directed by Carnegie Mellon and Intel" . Carnegie Mellon University. February 20, 2007. Archived from the original on June 22, 2014 . Retrieved June 19, 2014 .
^ a b "In Qatar's Education City, U.S. colleges are building an academic oasis" . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on March 5, 2016 . Retrieved October 27, 2016 .
^ Stoltzfus, Justin. "Advocate questions motive behind Qatar's financial ties to U.S. colleges" . Gulf News Journal . Archived from the original on April 18, 2016 . Retrieved October 27, 2016 .
^ "While U.S. universities see dollar signs in Qatari partnerships, some cry foul" . Gulf News Journal . Archived from the original on October 4, 2015 . Retrieved October 27, 2016 .
^ "Hate Preachers on Qatar Campus: Obama Gives Qatar Undeserved A+ on Fighting Incitement" . The Huffington Post . April 29, 2016. Archived from the original on October 22, 2016 . Retrieved October 27, 2016 .
^ "Home : Hunt Institute" . Hunt Institute for Botanical Documentation. Archived from the original on May 9, 2008 . Retrieved May 21, 2018 .
^ "Middle States Accreditation" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on July 23, 2013 . Retrieved January 26, 2013 .
^ Schackner, Bill; Chute, Eleanor (March 29, 2012). "Pitt, CMU make most of proximity" . Pittsburgh Post-Gazette . Pittsburgh, PA. Archived from the original on April 6, 2013 . Retrieved May 21, 2012 .
^ University of Pittsburgh: Undergraduate Admissions & Financial Aid Archived January 19, 2012, at the Wayback Machine . Pitt.edu. Retrieved on July 17, 2013.
^ "Welcome" . Pittsburgh Science of Learning Center. Archived from the original on December 5, 2011 . Retrieved December 2, 2011 .
^ "Cross Registration" . Pittsburgh Council on Higher Education. Archived from the original on July 27, 2020 . Retrieved December 2, 2011 .
^ "SLRF 2012 in Pittsburgh" . SLRF 2012 Organizing Committee. Archived from the original on January 19, 2012 . Retrieved December 2, 2011 .
^ "Three Pittsburgh institutions. One goal" . Pittsburgh Health Data Alliance. Archived from the original on March 13, 2015 . Retrieved March 16, 2015 .
^ "Alice.org" . Archived from the original on May 20, 2017 . Retrieved January 31, 2020 .
^ CMU's overview of the history of the Andrew Project Archived July 17, 2012, at the Wayback Machine
^ "University Discoveries" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on October 26, 2016 . Retrieved October 25, 2016 .
^ "The BLISS programming language: a history" (PDF) . Archived (PDF) from the original on April 11, 2019 . Retrieved August 27, 2019 .
^ McKusick, Marshall Kirk ; Bostic, Keith ; Karels, Michael J. ; Quarterman, John S. (April 30, 1996). The Design and Implementation of the 4.4 BSD Operating System . Addison-Wesley . p. 123. ISBN 978-0-7686-8494-0 .
^ "How Wi-Fi got its start on the campus of CMU, a true story" . Archived from the original on December 2, 2016 . Retrieved October 25, 2016 .
^ "Alex Hills-Engineering and Public Policy" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on October 26, 2016 . Retrieved October 25, 2016 .
^ Lindstrom, Natasha (October 25, 2016). "Shrewd venture capitalist makes $31M bet on Carnegie Mellon" . Pittsburgh Tribune-Review . Archived from the original on January 2, 2023 . Retrieved January 2, 2023 .
^ Heater, Brian (June 28, 2021). "How Carnegie Mellon is helping build its own startups and keeping them in Pittsburgh" . TechCrunch . Archived from the original on January 2, 2023 . Retrieved January 2, 2023 .
^ Burkholder, Sophie (April 11, 2022). "Why life sciences and big exits got the spotlight at CMU's 25th Project Olympus Show & Tell" . Technical.ly . Archived from the original on January 2, 2023 . Retrieved January 2, 2023 .
^ "Affiliated Companies-Corporate and Institutional Partnerships" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017 . Retrieved November 25, 2017 .
^ "CMU Alumni" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on October 19, 2017.
^ "College Scorecard: Carnegie Mellon University" . United States Department of Education . Archived from the original on June 30, 2022 . Retrieved May 8, 2022 .
^ Hester, Christa. "Three traditional CMU celebrations merge: Cèilidh Weekend" . The Tartan . Archived from the original on July 14, 2023 . Retrieved July 14, 2023 .
^ University, Carnegie Mellon. "Room Types - Housing & Residential Education - Student Affairs - Carnegie Mellon University" . www.cmu.edu . Archived from the original on March 26, 2023 . Retrieved March 26, 2023 .
^ "Carnegie Mellon University" . map.concept3d.com . Archived from the original on March 26, 2023 . Retrieved March 26, 2023 .
^ "CMU Housing" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on July 24, 2011 . Retrieved July 26, 2011 .
^ Fenton, Edwin (2000). Carnegie Mellon, 1900-2000 : a centennial history . Pittsburgh: Carnegie Mellon University Press. p. 80. ISBN 0-88748-323-2 . Retrieved January 15, 2025 .
^ "Specialized Communities" . Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved April 10, 2024 .
^ "Spirit House" . Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved April 12, 2024 .
^ "Walking Tour" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on May 16, 2008 . Retrieved February 18, 2008 .
^ "The Fence" . Atlas Obscura . Archived from the original on September 22, 2021 . Retrieved October 18, 2022 .
^ "Intercollegiate rifle team trophy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on September 1, 2009 . Retrieved September 5, 2009 .
^ "sports-reference.com Eastern Intercollegiate Conference" . Archived from the original on April 22, 2021 . Retrieved April 22, 2021 .
^ Biederman, Lester (March 17, 1936). "Tartan Five Whips Panthers to Annex Eastern Intercollegiate Court Crown!" . The Pittsburgh Press . Archived from the original on April 22, 2021 . Retrieved May 19, 2014 .
^ "Carnegie Mellon Ultimate Club" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on April 30, 2007 . Retrieved February 18, 2008 .
^ "Tartan Crew" . tartancrew.org. Archived from the original on March 11, 2008 . Retrieved February 18, 2008 .
^ "CMU Ice Hockey Club" . Archived from the original on February 1, 2011 . Retrieved February 18, 2008 .
^ "Join the Baseball Club" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on May 13, 2008 . Retrieved February 18, 2008 .
^ "Club Sports" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on June 7, 2014 . Retrieved June 19, 2014 .
^ "CMUWP" . cmuwp. Archived from the original on June 26, 2009 . Retrieved August 25, 2009 .
^ "Carnegie Mellon Cycling Club" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on September 5, 2008 . Retrieved February 18, 2008 .
^ "Tech's Greatest Victory" . carnegiemellontoday.com. Archived from the original on March 17, 2008 . Retrieved February 18, 2008 .
^ "Upset special: With Rockne gone, Irish took a Michigan-like tumble" . ESPN. Archived from the original on November 6, 2013 . Retrieved February 18, 2008 .
^ D'Andrea, Christian. "Track teams open season at home" . The Tartan . Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved July 14, 2023 .
^ Wellsville Central Schools – Scrapbook Archived September 29, 2011, at the Wayback Machine . Wellsville.wnyric.org (August 30, 2012). Retrieved on July 17, 2013.
^ "Intramurals" . Archived from the original on July 7, 2019 . Retrieved February 23, 2020 .
^ University, Carnegie Mellon. "Alumni - Institutional Research and Analysis - Office of Institutional Effectiveness and Planning - Carnegie Mellon University" . www.cmu.edu . Archived from the original on August 13, 2023 . Retrieved August 13, 2023 .
^ "Awards - CMU" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on September 9, 2016 . Retrieved September 4, 2016 .
^ "Carnegie Museum of Art" . collection.cmoa.org . Archived from the original on November 7, 2017 . Retrieved August 26, 2018 .
^ "John Currin at Gagosian" . www.gagosian.com . April 12, 2018. Archived from the original on August 30, 2017 . Retrieved September 11, 2017 .
^ Higgins, Tim. "New York 'Fusion' artist Shalom Neuman brings philosophy to Easton" . Archived from the original on September 8, 2017 . Retrieved September 10, 2017 .
^ "Jonathan Borofsky Interview" . Carnegie Mellon Today . Archived from the original on September 14, 2017 . Retrieved September 14, 2017 .
^ "Burton Morris: The King of Pop Art Hits the "Red Carpet" " . Archived from the original on May 2, 2019 . Retrieved February 13, 2013 .
^ "News - College of Fine Arts" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on July 24, 2019 . Retrieved May 15, 2019 .
^ University, Carnegie Mellon. "Press Release: CMU Drama Students Explore Theatrical Boundaries in "Playground: Festival of Independent Student Work" - News - Carnegie Mellon University" . www.cmu.edu . Archived from the original on March 27, 2023 . Retrieved March 27, 2023 .
^ davidedwardbyrd.com
^ "Notable Alumni" . Archived from the original on December 18, 2015 . Retrieved November 19, 2015 .
^ "Judy Resnik : Family, Friends Remember Engineer Who Reached for the Stars" . Archived from the original on January 31, 2016 . Retrieved February 7, 2016 .
^ "Alumnus Gets Star Treatment" . Carnegie Mellon Today . Archived from the original on February 2, 2017 . Retrieved January 23, 2017 .
^ "Major Motion Picture, 'Smart People,' To Be Filmed on Campus" . Carnegie Mellon University. Archived from the original on June 4, 2016 . Retrieved January 23, 2017 .
^ Holahan, Jane (December 7, 2006). "Creator on 'Pippin:' 'It was an inventive time' " . Lancaster Online. Archived from the original on September 12, 2007 . Retrieved December 30, 2006 .
^ "Show History" . Music Theatre International . Archived from the original on June 25, 2021 . Retrieved June 21, 2021 .
^ King, Susan (May 21, 1995). "Lenny and Squiggy: 'In a World of Their Own' " . Los Angeles Times . Archived from the original on June 24, 2021 . Retrieved June 21, 2021 .
^ Couric, Katie (April 30, 2009). "Randy Pausch – The 2008 Time 100" . Time . Archived from the original on June 6, 2012 . Retrieved February 22, 2010 .
^ Gans, Andrew. "Zachary Quinto and Matt Bomer Will Introduce New Educator Honor at 2014 Tony Awards" Archived July 14, 2014, at the Wayback Machine playbill.com, June 3, 2014
Links to related articles
Links to related articles