August 14-17, 2025
Liberty Avenue
Bloomfield
To All Bloomfield Little Italy Day Vendors,
We are fast approaching the Little Italy Days Festival, and we have a great line up of
entertainment with 30 acts over three stages and all of our advertising is in full effect - Street
banners, TV, Radio, Newspapers, Social Media and more. Please read this message in its
entirety as there are important details below for you as a vendor.
FOR FOOD VENDORS ONLY -
Set-Up
- Food Vendors Only – Set-up will be on Wednesday August 13th after 6 pm. Report to the
information tent located in front of First National Bank as we will escort you to your location. Bank
Address: 4724 Liberty Ave. Pittsburgh Pa 15224.
Electricity
-Food Vendors Only – You must bring your own QUIET generator it MUST NOT be loud.
Please keep in mind you may be asked to bring a new generator if it is found to be extremely loud
and bothersome to neighboring tents and the public. Please do not spill or leave any grease on
the street. You must remove and dispose of your own grease, also we will have a grease bin on
site for you to dispose of your grease. You must put a mat or similar down in your space and you
must clean up your space of all debris on Sunday before you leave. You must have a working fire
extinguisher on site and easily accessible.
Health Department Temporary Permit Application
-Food, Drink and Alcohol Vendors Only
You must complete the Health Department’s application and return to them BY AUGUST 1.
Here is the direct link to the form:
https://eapps.alleghenycounty.us/FoodTempPermits/
- Non Food Vendors Only – Set-up will be on Thursday August 14th after 9 am. You must arrive
no later than 4:00pm. If you arrive after 4pm you will need to set up Friday morning at 10 am.
Report to the information tent located in front of First National Bank as we will escort you to your
location. Bank Address: 4724 Liberty Ave. Pittsburgh Pa 15224.
- Local Vendors Only - Please keep in mind that other vendors will be next to you and please
only take up your allotted space.
- Saturday/Sunday Vendor - Please report to information tent at First National Bank address
4724 Liberty Ave. on Saturday at 10 am as we will escort you to your location. The street will be
closed but you will be able to drive to First National Bank up to 10am. Please notify the Police that
you are a vendor and you will be allowed to drive to the Bank. Please be patient with the set-up
process.
Time of Festival - Hours of Festival are -
Thursday August 14th 5 pm – 9 pm
Friday August 15th and Saturday August 16th 12 pm - 9pm
Sunday August 17th 12 pm – 5 pm. Everything must be removed by 8 pm on Sunday.
Set Up/Street Changeover - For set up Thursday and Friday your tent will be facing the sidewalk
as Liberty Avenue is open to traffic. On Saturday and Sunday Liberty Avenue will be closed and
we strongly recommend your tent face Liberty Avenue.
Street Closure - This year we are again closing Liberty Avenue on Saturday and Sunday. The
street will be closed at 8 am on Saturday and remain closed until 8 pm Sunday. Street closures
and detours will be posted, and will be on our website - www.littleitalydays.com. You may keep
your tent in the same position however we strongly suggest you face the street on Saturday and
Sunday.
Vendor Parking – Thursday – Sunday There is free parking in the Pearl Street parking lot
which is behind the St Maria Goretti church lot but NOT in the church lot. There is NO LONGER
vendor parking available in the lot at Gross Street. There is free parking in the Aspen Garage
Saturday and Sunday. Limited Parking is first-come first-serve. There are other free and paid
parking spaces around the festival footprint, and we are working on other options for vendors as
well. You will be there early to set up, so you shouldn’t have a problem finding parking. No parking
on side street sidewalks. Do not park illegally or you will be tagged and towed at your expense.
Electricity – NON-FOOD VENDORS ONLY - If you have purchased electricity please bring an
extension cord, power strip and duct tape. All extension cords MUST be covered. If you are
bringing a generator, it must be QUIET. You may be asked to shut it down if we receive
complaints from nearby vendors.
Tents - If bringing your own tent, it MUST be secured with sandbags or weights. Please bring
extra rope to tie to your neighbor’s tent to make them more secure in case of inclement weather
or other incidences. Last year we had a West Penn medical helicopter fly over Liberty Avenue
very low and close to our festival, causing major damage to several tents and vendor
merchandise. Also, in lieu of this, a reminder to all vendors that you must have your own
insurance and have Bloomfield Little Italy Days listed as an additional insured and submit that to
us. You can email the COI to info@littleitalydays.com.
Bloomfield Little Italy Days is NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR ANY LOSS, DAMAGE, OR THEFT.
Food Vendor tents must be fire rated.
Very Important – YOU MUST LOWER YOUR TENT AT THE END OF EACH NIGHT..
Final Payment - If you have not paid in full yet please send in your final payment asap or call to
make a credit card payment and will include a 3% credit card processing fee. Your credit card
statement will read "Pgh Wedding and Event Services" All balances must be paid in full before
setting up for the festival.
Security - We will have security throughout the festival and overnight, however we are not
responsible for lost or stolen items. Please take all valuables with you every night.
Garbage - All vendors are responsible for garbage clean up within your space. Please tie garbage
bags as we will be around periodically to pick up garbage. At the end of the festival on Sunday
your space must be clean and left as found when arrived with no debris or garbage left out other
than in bags and tied.
Thank you,
Sal Richetti
Bloomfield Little Italy Days
Festival Producer
412-377-2923
info@littleitalydays.com