Athletic facilities in Pittsburgh that are located outside of the Oakland neighborhood
include Acrisure Stadium and the UPMC Sports Performance Complex . [ 54 ] Major on-campus
residence halls include the Litchfield Towers , Schenley Quadrangle , Forbes Hall
, Bouquet Gardens and Ruskin Hall located on the lower campus, Lothrop Hall on the
medical campus, and Panther , Nordenberg Hall , and Sutherland halls located on the
upper campus. [ 55 ] University of Pittsburgh Medical Center The University of Pittsburgh
Medical Center (UPMC) is consistently ranked in U. S. News & World Report's "Honor
Roll" of America's top hospitals [ 56 ] and consists of the following hospitals and
facilities in the Pittsburgh neighborhood of Oakland , many of which have shared uses
with various University departments: UPMC Presbyterian Hospital, UPMC Montefiore Hospital,
Magee-Women's Hospital of UPMC, Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic in Thomas
Detre Hall, Eye and Ear Institute, Forbes Tower (home to the School of Health and
Rehabilitation Sciences ), Iroquois Building, Kaufman Medical Building, Medical Arts
Building, 230 McKee Place, and UPMC University Center. UPMC academic hospitals and
facilities elsewhere in Pittsburgh include the UPMC Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh
campus in the Lawrenceville neighborhood, the UPMC Sports Performance Complex on the
South Side , and the UPMC Shadyside and the University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute
in the Hillman Cancer Center (both located in the Shadyside neighborhood adjacent
to Oakland). [ 57 ] Regional campuses allow students to take preliminary courses and
relocate to other regional campuses or the Oakland campus to complete their degrees.
They offer several degrees and certificates: The University of Pittsburgh has been
noted for both its role in community outreach and its impact on the economy of the
city and the Western Pennsylvania region. In 2009, Pitt was ranked second overall,
and the top public university in the nation, as a "Best Neighbor" for positive impact
on its urban community, including both commercial and residential activities such
as revitalization, cultural renewal, economics, and community service and development
according to the "Saviors of Our Cities" ranking. [ 58 ] Pitt was also listed as a
"best neighbor" in the previous ranking released in 2006. [ 59 ] These rankings reflect
the statistics that each year Pitt spends more than $1. 7 billion in the community
and supports nearly 33, 800 jobs in Allegheny County . The university is the Pittsburgh
region's second largest non-government employer behind its affiliated University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center (UPMC). [ 60 ] Pitt's research program alone imports more
than $822 million into the region each year (more than $3. 60 for each $1 of state
appropriations), and supports some 23, 100 local jobs. [ 61 ] [ 14 ] [ 23 ] Pitt students
also spend more than $213 million on goods, services, and rental payments within the
local economy. [ 62 ] Pitt ranked sixth in the number of startups spawned by technologies
developed by its researchers according to Association of University Technology Managers.