Business school of Carnegie Mellon University The Tepper School of Business is the
business school of Carnegie Mellon University . It is located in the university's
140-acre (0. 57 km 2 ) campus in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania . The school offers degrees
from the undergraduate through doctoral levels, in addition to executive education
programs. The Tepper School of Business, originally known as the Graduate School of
Industrial Administration (GSIA), was founded in 1949 by William Larimer Mellon .
In March 2004, the school received a record $55 million gift from alumnus David Tepper
[ 4 ] and was renamed the David A. Tepper School of Business. Numerous Nobel Prize-winning
economists have been affiliated with the school, including alumni Dale T. Mortensen
, Oliver Williamson , Edward Prescott , Finn Kydland and faculty members Herbert A.
Simon , Franco Modigliani , Merton Miller , Robert Lucas , and Lars Peter Hansen .
In 1946, economist George Leland Bach was hired by the Carnegie Institute of Technology
(predecessor of Carnegie Mellon University) to restart the school's economics department.
Bach had previously been working at the Federal Reserve during World War II . He added
William W. Cooper from the field of Operations Research (which had increased its visibility
during the war) and Herbert A. Simon , a political scientist who was to direct the
undergraduate business program. The beginnings of the Cold War were applying pressure
on the academic community to increase US managerial ability, and when William Larimer
Mellon gave a $6 million grant to found a school of industrial administration , Bach
became the first dean, bringing along the entire economics department. [ 5 ] Under
Bach's leadership, in 1958, the school's Management Game was the first to use computer
simulations for experiential learning of business roles; such simulations have subsequently
been adopted by other institutions. [ 6 ] In 1989, the school's Financial Analysis
and Security Trading Center (FAST) was the first educational institution to successfully
replicate the live international data feeds and sophisticated software of Wall Street
trading firms. [ 7 ] Prior to the founding of the Tepper School, management education
typically used the case method approach popularized at the Harvard Business School
, based upon examples from successful companies and microeconomic theory . [ 8 ] Although
the Tepper School did not entirely abandon those traditional models and theories,