lasted for two months. [ 15 ] Pontiac's warriors kept up a continuous, though ineffective,
fire on it from July 27 through August 1, 1763. [ 21 ] They drew off to confront the
relieving party under Colonel Bouquet, which defeated them in the Battle of Bushy
Run . [ 21 ] This victory ensured British dominion over the forks of the Ohio, if
not the entire Ohio valley. In 1764 Colonel Bouquet added a redoubt , the Fort Pitt
Blockhouse , which still stands, the sole remaining structure from Fort Pitt and the
oldest authenticated building west of the Allegheny Mountains . [ 15 ] The Iroquois
signed the Fort Stanwix Treaty of 1768 , ceding the lands south of the Ohio to the
British Crown . [ 21 ] European expansion into the upper Ohio valley increased. An
estimated 4, 000 to 5, 000 families settled in western Pennsylvania between 1768 and
1770. Of these settlers, about a third were English-American , another third were
Scotch-Irish , and the rest were Welsh , German and others. [ 23 ] These groups tended
to settle together in small farming communities, but often their households were not
within hailing distance. The life of a settler family was one of relentless hard work:
clearing the forest, stumping the fields, building cabins and barns, planting, weeding,
and harvesting. In addition, almost everything was manufactured by hand, including
furniture, tools, candles, buttons, and needles. [ 23 ] Settlers had to deal with
harsh winters, and with snakes, black bears, mountain lions, and timber wolves. Because
of the fear of raids by Native Americans, the settlers often built their cabins near,
or even on top of, springs, to ensure access to water. They also built blockhouses,
where neighbors would rally during conflicts. [ 4 ] Increasing violence, especially
by the Shawnee , Miami , and Wyandot tribes, led to Dunmore's War in 1774. Conflict
with Native Americans continued throughout the Revolutionary War , as some hoped that
the war would end with expulsion of the settlers from their territory. In 1777, Fort
Pitt became a United States fort, when Brigadier General Edward Hand took command.
In 1779, Colonel Daniel Brodhead led 600 men from Fort Pitt to destroy Seneca villages
along the upper Allegheny. [ 4 ] With the war still ongoing, in 1780 Virginia and
Pennsylvania came to an agreement on their mutual borders, creating the state lines
known today and determining finally that the jurisdiction of Pittsburgh region was
Pennsylvanian. In 1783, the Revolutionary War ended, which also brought at least a
temporary cessation of border warfare. In the 1784 Treaty of Fort Stanwix , the Iroquois
ceded the land north of the Purchase Line to Pennsylvania. [ 4 ] After the Revolution,
the village of Pittsburgh continued to grow. One of its earliest industries was boat
building . Flatboats could be used to carry large numbers of pioneers and goods downriver,