Science museum in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania Kamin Science Center , [ 2 ] [ needs update
] formerly Carnegie Science Center , is one of the four Carnegie Museums of Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania . It is located in the Chateau [ 3 ] neighborhood, across the street
from Acrisure Stadium . Kamin Science Center is the most visited museum in Pittsburgh
[ citation needed ] , and is located along the Ohio River on the North Shore. It has
five floors of interactive exhibits totaling over 400 exhibits, and attracts nearly
500, 000 visitors each year. [ 1 ] [ 4 ] Among its attractions are the Buhl Planetarium
(which features the latest in digital projection technology), the Rangos Giant Theater
(promoted as "the biggest screen in Pittsburgh"), a physical home for some of Carnegie
Mellon University ’s Robot Hall of Fame (in the lobby of the Rangos Giant Cinema),
[ 5 ] the Miniature Railroad & Village , and the USS Requin (a World War II submarine
). In September 2025, the Science Center proudly unveiled its new name [ 6 ] following
a transformative $65 million gift from Daniel G. and Carole L. Kamin. This historic
donation marks the beginning of an exciting new chapter, with several major projects
set to launch over the next two years. These initiatives will enhance more than 75%
of the Science Center’s exhibit spaces , creating dynamic, inclusive, and future-focused
experiences for all visitors: Peirce Atrium: A stunning, interactive installation
will fill the museum’s four-story atrium with light, movement, and imagination—bringing
science to life in a bold new way. Building Futures Exhibition: This groundbreaking
exhibit will highlight the science behind skilled trades and showcase the innovation
driving some of today’s most in-demand careers. Responsive Science Display: A powerful
new experience will explore the local impacts of climate change in Southwestern Pennsylvania
through immersive storytelling and cutting-edge design. North Lot Beautification Project:
A community-centered transformation of the museum’s north parking lot will introduce
expanded green space and engaging science displays. 1st Floor Gallery Refresh: A completely
reimagined space will energize visitors with hands-on, interactive exhibits designed
to spark curiosity and discovery. Early Learners Space: A brand-new 4th Floor exhibition
will invite young explorers into a world of age-appropriate science play, fostering
early curiosity and learning. Its predecessor was the Buhl Planetarium and Institute