gave away much of his fortunes to various peacekeeping agencies in order to keep them
growing. When a friend, the British writer William T. Stead , asked him to create
a new organization for the goal of a peace and arbitration society, his reply was:
I do not see that it is wise to devote our efforts to creating another organization.
Of course I may be wrong in believing that, but I am certainly not wrong that if it
were dependent on any millionaire's money it would begin as an object of pity and
end as one of derision. I wonder that you do not see this. There is nothing that robs
a righteous cause of its strength more than a millionaire's money. Its life is tainted
thereby. [ 141 ] Carnegie believed that it is the effort and will of the people, that
maintains the peace in international relations. Money is just a push for the act.
If world peace depended solely on financial support, it would not seem a goal, but
more like an act of pity. Like Stead, he believed that the United States and the British
Empire would merge into one nation, telling him "We are heading straight to the Re-United
States". Carnegie believed that the combined country's power would maintain world
peace and disarmament. [ 142 ] The creation of the Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace in 1910 was regarded as a milestone on the road to the ultimate goal of abolition
of war. Beyond a gift of $10 million for peace promotion, Carnegie also encouraged
the "scientific" investigation of the various causes of war, and the adoption of judicial
methods that should eventually eliminate them. He believed that the Endowment exists
to promote information on the nations' rights and responsibilities under existing
international law and to encourage other conferences to codify this law. [ 143 ] Legacy
and honors In 1899, Andrew Carnegie was awarded American Library Association Honorary
Membership . Carnegie received the honorary Doctor of Laws (DLL) from the University
of Glasgow in June 1901, [ 144 ] and received the Freedom of the City of Glasgow "in
recognition of his munificence" later the same year. [ 145 ] In July 1902, he received
the Freedom of the city of St Andrews , "in testimony of his great zeal for the welfare
of his fellow-men on both sides of the Atlantic", [ 146 ] and in October 1902 the
Freedom of the City of Perth "in testimony of his high personal worth and beneficial
influence, and in recognition of widespread benefactions bestowed on this and other
lands, and especially in gratitude for the endowment granted by him for the promotion
of University education in Scotland. " [ 147 ] and the Freedom of the City of Dundee
. [ 148 ] Also in 1902, he was elected as a member to the American Philosophical Society