International Airport , the Ohio end of the Turnpike and Interstate 80 . The "parkway
north" is Interstate 279 connecting to I-79. The "crosstown" is Interstate 579 allowing
access to the heart of downtown, the Liberty Tunnels and the PPG Paints Arena . The
45-mile-long and 70-mile-long expressway sections of Pennsylvania Route 28 and U.
S. Route 22 also carry traffic from downtown to the northeast and western suburbs,
respectively. Interstate 70 , 79 and 76 (the Turnpike) roughly form a triangular-shaped
"beltway" with Interstate 68 and 80 within the media market's northern and southern
limits. Turnpike spurs such as the Mon–Fayette Expressway , Pennsylvania Route 576
and Route 66 also help traffic flow. The non-expressway Pittsburgh/Allegheny County
Belt System serves navigation in the region. Pittsburgh International Airport provides
commercial passenger service from over 15 airlines to the Pittsburgh metropolitan
area . Arnold Palmer Regional Airport also provides limited commercial passenger service
and is 44 miles (71 km) east of Pittsburgh. Other airports that have or have had scheduled
commercial service include Morgantown Municipal Airport (79 miles (127 km) south of
Pittsburgh), Youngstown–Warren Regional Airport (81 miles (130 km) northwest of Pittsburgh),
Akron–Canton Airport (120 miles (190 km) northwest of Pittsburgh), Johnstown–Cambria
County Airport (60 miles (97 km) east of Pittsburgh) and Erie International Airport
(123 miles (198 km) north of Pittsburgh). Intercity passenger rail and bus Amtrak
provides intercity rail service to Pittsburgh Union Station , via the Capitol Limited
between Chicago and Washington, D. C. , and the Pennsylvanian to New York City. Megabus
, Greyhound Lines , and Fullington Trailways connect Pittsburgh with distant cities
by bus; Greyhound and Fullington Trailways buses stop at the Grant Street Transportation
Center intercity bus terminal. Popular destinations include Philadelphia , New York
City , and Washington, D. C. [ 280 ] Until declines in passenger travel in the 1950s
and 1960s, several stations served Pittsburgh: Baltimore & Ohio Station , Pittsburgh
& Lake Erie Railroad Station , Wabash Pittsburgh Terminal and Pittsburgh Union Station.
Regional mass transit Pittsburgh Regional Transit , formerly known as the Port Authority
of Allegheny County, is the region's mass transit system. While serving only a portion
of the Pittsburgh area, the nation's 20th-largest metropolitan area, it is the 11th-largest
transit agency in the United States. [ 281 ] Pittsburgh Regional Transit runs a network
of intracity and intercity bus routes, the Monongahela Incline Funicular railway (more
commonly known as an "incline") on Mount Washington, a light rail system that runs
mostly above-ground in the suburbs and underground as a subway in the city, and one
of the nation's largest busway systems. [ 282 ] Pittsburgh Regional Transit owns the
Duquesne Incline but it is operated by a non-profit preservation trust, [ 283 ] but
accepts Pittsburgh Regional Transit passes and charges PRT fares. The Bus System lines
are labeled by number and letter . These are the largest portion of Pittsburgh Regional