mobilize the world's churches, religious organizations, and other spiritual and moral
resources to join in promoting moral leadership to put an end to war forever. For
its inaugural international event, the CPU sponsored a conference to be held on August
1, 1914, on the shores of Lake Constance in southern Germany. As the delegates made
their way to the conference by train, Germany was invading Belgium. Despite its inauspicious
beginning, the CPU thrived. Today its focus is on ethics, and it is known as the Carnegie
Council for Ethics in International Affairs , an independent, nonpartisan, nonprofit
organization, whose mission is to be the voice for ethics in international affairs.
The outbreak of the First World War was clearly a shock to Carnegie and his optimistic
view on world peace. Although his promotion of anti-imperialism and world peace had
all failed, and the Carnegie Endowment had not fulfilled his expectations, his beliefs
and ideas on international relations had helped build the foundation of the League
of Nations after his death, which took world peace to another level. United States
colonial expansion On the matter of American colonial expansion , Carnegie had always
thought it is an unwise gesture for the United States. He did not oppose the annexation
of the Hawaiian islands or Puerto Rico , but he opposed the annexation of the Philippines
. Carnegie believed that it involved a denial of the fundamental democratic principle,
and he also urged William McKinley to withdraw American troops and allow the Filipinos
to live with their independence. [ 140 ] This act strongly impressed the other American
anti-imperialists, who soon elected him vice-president of the Anti-Imperialist League.
After he sold his steel company in 1901, Carnegie was able to get fully involved in
the peace cause, both financially and personally. He gave away much of his fortunes
to various peacekeeping agencies in order to keep them growing. When a friend, the
British writer William T. Stead , asked him to create a new organization for the goal
of a peace and arbitration society, his reply was: I do not see that it is wise to
devote our efforts to creating another organization. Of course I may be wrong in believing
that, but I am certainly not wrong that if it were dependent on any millionaire's
money it would begin as an object of pity and end as one of derision. I wonder that
you do not see this. There is nothing that robs a righteous cause of its strength
more than a millionaire's money. Its life is tainted thereby. [ 141 ] Carnegie believed
that it is the effort and will of the people, that maintains the peace in international
relations. Money is just a push for the act. If world peace depended solely on financial
support, it would not seem a goal, but more like an act of pity. Like Stead, he believed
that the United States and the British Empire would merge into one nation, telling