industries such as aluminum and oil. As Barnhisel (2005) finds, industrialists such
as James Laughlin (b. Ulster 1806–1882) of Jones and Laughlin Steel Company comprised
the "Scots-Irish Presbyterian ruling stratum of Pittsburgh society. " [ 37 ] In 1859,
the Clinton and Soho iron furnaces introduced coke -fire smelting to the region. The
American Civil War boosted the city's economy with increased production of iron and
armaments, especially at the Allegheny Arsenal and the Fort Pitt Foundry . [ 33 ]
Arms manufacture included iron-clad warships and the world's first 21" gun. [ 38 ]
By war's end, over one-half of the steel and more than one-third of all U. S. glass
was produced in Pittsburgh. A milestone in steel production was achieved in 1875,
when the Edgar Thomson Works in Braddock began to make steel rail using the new Bessemer
process . [ 39 ] Industrialists such as Andrew Carnegie , Henry Clay Frick , Charles
M. Schwab , and George Westinghouse built their fortunes in Pittsburgh. George Westinghouse
's advancements included the air brake and was the founder of over 60 companies, including
Westinghouse Air and Brake Company (1869), Union Switch & Signal (1881), and Westinghouse
Electric Company (1886). [ 40 ] Banks played a key role in Pittsburgh's development
as these industrialists sought massive loans to upgrade plants, integrate industries
and fund technological advances. Pittsburgh bankers including Andrew W. Mellon , with
T. Mellon & Sons Bank founded in 1869, helped to finance an aluminum reduction company
that became Alcoa . [ 39 ] Ingham (1991) shows how small, independent iron and steel
manufacturers survived and prospered from the 1870s through the 1950s, despite competition
from much larger, standardized production firms. These smaller firms were built on
a culture that valued local markets and the beneficial role of business in the local
community. Small firms concentrated on specialized products, particularly structural
steel, where the economies of scale of larger firms were no advantage. They embraced
technological change more cautiously than larger firms. They also had less antagonistic
relations with workers and employed a higher percentage of highly skilled workers
than their mass-production counterparts. [ 42 ] Geography of industrialization Beginning
in the 1870s, entrepreneurs transformed the economy from small, craft-organized factories
located inside the city limits to a large integrated industrial region stretching
50 miles across Allegheny County. The new industrial Pittsburgh was based on integrated
mills, mass production, and modern management organization in steel and other industries.
Many manufacturers searched for large sites with railroad and river accessibility.
They purchased land, designed modern plants, and sometimes built towns for workers.
Other firms bought into new communities that began as speculative industrial real
estate ventures. Some owners removed their plants from the central city's labor unions
to exert greater control over workers. The region's rugged topography and dispersed
natural resources of coal and gas accentuated this dispersal. The rapid growth of
steel, glass, railroad equipment, and coke industries resulted in both large mass-production