departments in the nation. Their mission statement was "to cultivate a course of study
leading to the PhD degree in computer science , a program that would exploit the new
technology and assist in establishing a discipline of computer science . " The educational
program, formally accepted in October 1965, drew its first graduate students from
several existing academic disciplines: mathematics, electrical engineering , psychology
, and the interdisciplinary Systems and Communications Sciences program in the Graduate
School of Industrial Administration . The department was housed within the Mellon
College of Science . With support from Newell, Simon, Nico Haberman , Provost Angel
Jordan and President Richard Cyert , the computer science department began a two-year
status as a "floating" department in the early months of 1986. Then, the Department
began to grow, both academically and financially. In 1988, the School of Computer
Science was established, among the first such schools in the country. The Computer
Science Department was the original department within the school. [ 3 ] Structure
in the 1970s During the 1970s the Computer Science Department offered only a PhD study
program, with no master's degree as an intermediate step. The PhD program required
a minimum of six years of residency. It was called the "do or die" program among the
graduate students, because a student could not drop a PhD and receive a master's degree.
It had quickly focused on computer networking, operating systems ( Hydra , Accent
, Mach ), and robotics . Organizational units Gates and Hillman Centers The Gates
Center for Computer Science and the Hillman Center for Future-Generation Technologies
are home to much of the School of Computer Science. The $98 million complex was opened
in 2009. [ 4 ] It has 217, 000-square-foot (20, 200 m 2 ) of floor space, including
about 310 offices, 11 conference rooms, 32 labs, 8, 000 square feet (740 m 2 ) of
project space and the Planetary Robotics Center. It also houses 12 classrooms, including
a 250-seat auditorium. [ 5 ] Additionally, the Gates Center connects to the Purnell
Center, which houses the School of Drama, via the Randy Pausch Memorial Footbridge.
The bridge represents Professor Pausch's own devotion to linking computer science
and entertainment, as he was a co-founder of Carnegie Mellon's Entertainment Technology
Center . Mack Scogin Merril Elam Architects of Atlanta , Georgia were the lead architects.
[ 4 ] The Gates and Hillman Centers have received LEED Gold Certification. [ 7 ] Carnegie
Mellon's Mobot Races , now in their 14th year, are hosted by the School of Computer
Science during every Spring Carnival celebration. The Mobots (short for mobile robots
) follow a slalom course painted in the sidewalk outside of Wean Hall. The Mobot Races
used to include a MoboJoust competition, but it has not been held since 2002 [ 8 ]
to avoid damaging the Mobots. [ 9 ] SCS Day is a yearly celebration of computer science