more prospects for career growth and experience there than with the telegraph company.
[ 14 ] When Carnegie was 24 years old, Scott asked him if he could handle being superintendent
of the Western Division of the Pennsylvania Railroad. [ 29 ] On December 1, 1859,
Carnegie officially became superintendent of the Western Division. He hired his sixteen-year-old
brother Tom to be his personal secretary and telegraph operator. Carnegie also hired
his cousin, Maria Hogan, who became the first female telegraph operator in the country.
[ 30 ] As superintendent, Carnegie made a salary of $1500 a year ($52, 000 by 2024
inflation). [ 29 ] His employment by the Pennsylvania Railroad would be vital to his
later success. The railroads were the first big businesses in America, and the Pennsylvania
was one of the largest. Carnegie learned much about management and cost control during
these years, and from Scott in particular. [ 14 ] Scott also helped him with his first
investments. Many of these were part of the corruption indulged in by Scott and the
president of the Pennsylvania Railroad, John Edgar Thomson , which consisted of inside
trading in companies with which the railroad did business, or payoffs made by contracting
parties "as part of a quid pro quo ". [ 31 ] In 1855, Scott made it possible for Carnegie
to invest $500 in the Adams Express Company , which contracted with the Pennsylvania
to carry its messengers. The money was secured by his mother's placing of a $600 mortgage
on the family's $700 home, but the opportunity was available only because of Carnegie's
close relationship with Scott. [ 31 ] [ 32 ] A few years later, he received a few
shares in Theodore Tuttle Woodruff 's sleeping car company as a reward for holding
shares that Woodruff had given to Scott and Thomson, as a payoff. Reinvesting his
returns in such inside investments in railroad-related industries (iron, bridges,
and rails ), Carnegie slowly accumulated capital, the basis for his later success.
Throughout his later career, he made use of his close connections to Thomson and Scott,
as he established businesses that supplied rails and bridges to the railroad, offering
the two men stakes in his enterprises. 1860–1865: American Civil War Before the American
Civil War , Carnegie arranged a merger between Woodruff's company and that of George
Pullman , the inventor of the sleeping car for first-class travel , which facilitated
business travel at distances over 500 miles (800 km). The investment proved a success
and a source of profit for Woodruff and Carnegie. The young Carnegie continued to
work for Pennsylvania's Tom Scott and introduced several improvements in the service.
[ 33 ] In the spring of 1861, Carnegie was appointed by Scott, who was now Assistant
Secretary of War in charge of military transportation, as Superintendent of the Military
Railways and the Union Government's telegraph lines in the East. Carnegie helped open