Settlers began arriving after Native American forces led by Ottawa chief Pontiac were
defeated in 1763; an agreement subsequently was made between Native American groups
and the Penn family, and a boundary dispute was ended between Pennsylvania and Virginia.
Pittsburgh was laid out (1764) by John Campbell in the area around the fort (now the
Golden Triangle). Following the American Revolution , the town became an outfitting
point for settlers traveling westward down the Ohio River. Pittsburgh’s strategic
location and wealth of natural resources spurred its commercial and industrial growth
in the 19th century. A blast furnace , erected by George Anschutz about 1792, was
the forerunner of the iron and steel industry that for more than a century was the
city’s economic mainstay; by 1850 Pittsburgh was known as the “Iron City. ” The Pennsylvania
Canal and the Portage Railroad, both completed in 1834, opened vital markets for trade
and shipping. The city suffered a great loss in 1845 when some 24 blocks of businesses,
homes, churches, and other buildings were destroyed by fire. Britannica Quiz Guess
the City by Its River Quiz After the American Civil War , great numbers of European
immigrants swelled Pittsburgh’s population, and industrial magnates such as Andrew
Carnegie , Henry Clay Frick , and Thomas Mellon built their steel empires there. The
city became the focus of historic friction between labour and management, and the
American Federation of Labor was born there in 1881. By 1900 the city’s population
had reached 321, 616. Growth continued nearly unabated through World War II , the
war years bringing a particularly great boon for the economy. The population crested
at more than 675, 000 in 1950, after which it steadily declined; by the end of the
century, it had returned almost to the 1900 level. Most citizens were still of European
ancestry, but the growing African American proportion of the population exceeded one-fourth.
During the period of economic and population growth , Pittsburgh had come to epitomize
the grimy, polluted industrial city. After the war, however, the city undertook an
extensive redevelopment program that emphasized smoke-pollution control, flood prevention,
and sewage disposal. In 1957 it became the first American city to generate electricity
by nuclear power . The contemporary city By the late 1970s and early ’80s, the steel
industry had virtually disappeared—a result of foreign competition and decreased demand.
Many of the surrounding mill towns were laid to waste by unemployment , becoming a
symbol of the notorious Rust Belt , the U. S. region where steelmaking and manufacturing
once thrived before succumbing to widespread unemployment and poverty . Pittsburgh,
however, successfully diversified its economy through more emphasis on light industries—though
metalworking, chemicals, and plastics remained important—and on such high-technology
industries as computer software, industrial automation (robotics), and biomedical
and environmental technologies. Numerous industrial research laboratories were established
in the area, and the service sector became increasingly important. Pittsburgh long