language, Andy Bechtolsheim , co-founder of Sun Microsystems ; David Kelley , co-founder
of IDEO ; George Pake , founder of Xerox PARC ; Marc Ewing , co-founder of Red Hat
; Jim Levy , founding CEO of Activision ; billionaire hedge fund investor and owner
of the Carolina Panthers of the National Football League David Tepper ; Scott Fahlman
, creator of the emoticon ; Chris Messina , creator of the hashtag ; tech executive
and entrepreneur Kai-Fu Lee ; and astronauts Edgar Mitchell ( Apollo 14 ) and Judith
Resnik , who perished in the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster. [ 184 ] John Forbes
Nash , a 1948 graduate and winner of the 1994 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics ,
was the subject of the book and subsequent film A Beautiful Mind . Alan Perlis , a
1943 graduate, was a pioneer in programming languages and recipient of the first Turing
Award. Alumni in politics include U. S. Representatives Susie Lee and Sydney Kamlager-Dove
, Puerto Rican politician Carmen Yulín Cruz , Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago President
Charles L. Evans , Allegheny County Executive Rich Fitzgerald , and former General
Motors CEO and Secretary of Defense , Charles Erwin Wilson . The campus of Carnegie
Mellon in Pittsburgh has served as the locale for many motion pictures. Alumnus George
A. Romero filmed Creepshow (1982) in and around Margaret Morrison Carnegie Hall. [
185 ] Much of the on-campus scenes in the 2000 film Wonder Boys , starring Michael
Douglas and Tobey Maguire , were filmed in Carnegie Mellon's campus. [ 186 ] Other
movies filmed at Carnegie Mellon include The Mothman Prophecies , Dogma , Lorenzo's
Oil , Hoffa , The Dark Knight Rises , Where'd You Go, Bernadette , and Flashdance
. The university is also featured prominently in the films Smart People , Monkey Shines
, and in the anime Summer Wars . The musical Pippin was originally conceived by Stephen
Schwartz as a student musical performed by the Scotch'n'Soda student theatre troupe.
[ 187 ] Schwartz also collaborated with drama student John-Michael Tebelak to expand
his master's thesis project titled Godspell , created under the direction of Lawrence
Carra , into a musical. [ 188 ] While enrolled at Carnegie Mellon, acting students
Michael McKean and David Lander (class of 1969) created the characters "Lenny and
Squiggy". [ 189 ] The pair continued performing the characters in live comedy routines
before joining the cast of the TV series Laverne & Shirley . In 2008, Carnegie Mellon
professor Randy Pausch 's " Last Lecture " became a pop culture phenomenon. Based
on a lecture he gave in September 2007 – shortly after he learned his cancer had metastasized
– his book quickly rose to the top of bestseller lists around the country. Named in
Time magazine's Time 100 list of influential people, he died in July 2008 from pancreatic