mill property and redeveloped it into the SouthSide Works mixed-use development. The
East End includes key institutions including the University of Pittsburgh , Carnegie
Mellon University , Carnegie Museums of Art and Natural History , and Phipps Conservatory
. It features many parks, including Mellon Park , Westinghouse Park , Schenley Park
, Frick Park , The Frick Pittsburgh , Bakery Square , and the Pittsburgh Zoo , and
vibrant neighborhoods like Shadyside . Squirrel Hill is also known as the hub of Jewish
life in Pittsburgh, home to approximately 20 synagogues. [ 61 ] Oakland is home to
several universities and the Petersen Events Center . The Strip District to the west
along the Allegheny River is an open-air marketplace by day and a clubbing destination
by night. Bloomfield is Pittsburgh's Little Italy and is known for its Italian restaurants
and grocers. Lawrenceville is a revitalizing rowhouse neighborhood popular with artists
and designers. The Hill District was home to photographer Charles Harris as well as
various African-American jazz clubs. [ 62 ] The West End includes Mt. Washington ,
with its famous view of the downtown skyline, and numerous other residential neighborhoods
such as Sheraden and Elliott . Pittsburgh falls within the borders of the Northeastern
United States as defined by multiple US Government agencies. Pittsburgh is the principal
city of the Pittsburgh Combined Statistical Area , a combined statistical area defined
by the U. S. Census Bureau . Pittsburgh falls within the borders of Appalachia as
defined by the Appalachian Regional Commission , and has long been characterized as
the "northern urban industrial anchor of Appalachia. " [ 65 ] In its post-industrial
state, Pittsburgh has been characterized as the "Paris of Appalachia", [ 66 ] [ 67
] [ 68 ] [ 69 ] recognizing the city's cultural, educational, healthcare, and technological
resources, and is the largest city in Appalachia. Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania Climate
chart ( explanation ) J F M A M J J A S O N D █ Average max. and min. temperatures
in °F █ Precipitation totals in inches J J F F M M A A M M J J J J A A S S O O N N
D D █ Average max. and min. temperatures in °F █ Precipitation totals in inches Metric
conversion J F M A M J J A S O N D █ Average max. and min. temperatures in °C █ Precipitation
totals in mm Metric conversion J J F F M M A A M M J J J J A A S S O O N N D D █ Average
max. and min. temperatures in °C █ Precipitation totals in mm Under the Köppen climate
classification , Pittsburgh falls within either a hot-summer humid continental climate
( Dfa ) if the 0 °C (32 °F) isotherm is used or a humid subtropical climate ( Cfa
) if the −3 °C (27 °F) isotherm is used. Summers are hot and winters are moderately