hold joint professorships between the two schools, and students at each university
may take classes at the other (with appropriate approvals). [ 168 ] Pitt students
and faculty also have access to the CMU library system, as well as the Carnegie Library
of Pittsburgh , through the Oakland Library Consortium. [ 169 ] The two universities
also co-host academic conferences, such as the 2012 Second Language Research Forum.
[ 170 ] Undergraduate student housing comprises both traditional residence halls and
apartment style housing. On the lower campus, the three cylindrical towers of the
Litchfield Towers complex houses the most students on campus and contains the primary
dining facility for the university. The Schenley Quadrangle , originally serving as
one of city's most desirably luxury apartment complexes, comprises five separate residence
halls: Amos, Brackenridge, Bruce, Holland, and McCormick. Bruce Hall houses many Honors
College and Living and Learning Community (LLC) students, Holland Hall formerly served
as an all female residence, and Amos Hall serves as the primary home of the university's
sororities with each floor being occupied by a different Greek organization. Ruskin
Hall is located near Clapp Hall and the biological complex . Completed in 2013, Nordenberg
Hall is the newest residence hall houses freshmen. Forbes Hall , located on Forbes
Avenue, houses mainly freshmen involved in LLCs (Living Learning Communities). Lothrop
Hall , originally built as a nursing student residence, houses students on the medical
center complex . Bouquet Gardens offers garden style apartments mostly to upperclassmen.
The Forbes Craig Apartments serve as the primary residence for Honors College students.
The upper campus houses Sutherland Hall , home of several Living Learning Communities,
as well as Panther Hall and Irvis Hall , which mainly house upperclassmen. Various
fraternity housing is also found on the upper campus, as well as the Darragh Street
Apartments which house medical students within a short walk to medical school's Scaife
Hall . Many students, especially upperclassmen, also choose to live off campus in
the nearby South Oakland neighborhood in both university and non-university owned
apartments. Several traditions have become part of student life at Pitt over the years.
One of the oldest traditions is "Lantern Night", an annual ceremony that serves as
a formal induction for freshman women to university life. [ 92 ] [ 59 ] The tradition
of sliding or stepping on the former home plate of Forbes Field embedded in the floor
of Posvar Hall is performed by students in search of some good luck. [ 172 ] [ 173
] [ 174 ] [ 175 ] Another good luck tradition involves rubbing the nose of the Millennium
Panther outside the William Pitt Union prior to exams. [ 176 ] Originated by students
seeking good luck on exams, this tradition has further grown into one that is used
by the wider university community when seeking general good fortune, particularly
prior to football games or other athletic contests, and was featured in a national