in economic activity that supports over 10, 000 full-time equivalent jobs with nearly
$34 million in local and state taxes raised. [ 144 ] A leader in environmental design
, the city is home to 60 total and 10 of the world's first green buildings while billions
have been invested in the area's Marcellus natural gas fields. [ 145 ] A renaissance
of Pittsburgh's 116-year-old film industry—that boasts the world's first movie theater
—has grown from the long-running Three Rivers Film Festival to an influx of major
television and movie productions . including Disney and Paramount offices with the
largest sound stage outside Los Angeles and New York City. [ 146 ] Pittsburgh has
hosted many conventions, including INPEX , the world's largest invention trade show,
since 1984; [ 147 ] Tekko , a four-day anime convention, since 2003; Anthrocon , a
furry convention, since 2006; and the DUG East energy trade show since 2009. Pittsburgh
boasts a rich arts and culture scene, with a history dating back to 19th-century industrialists
who commissioned and donated public works including Heinz Hall for the Performing
Arts and the Benedum Center , home to the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra and Pittsburgh
Opera . Other prominent groups include the River City Brass Band and Pittsburgh Youth
Symphony Orchestra . The city also hosts a variety of smaller arts organizations,
such as Pittsburgh Irish and Classical Theatre , Quantum Theatre , the Renaissance
and Baroque Society of Pittsburgh , and Chatham Baroque , an early music ensemble.
University choirs include the Pitt Men's Glee Club and Heinz Chapel Choir . The Pittsburgh
Ballet Theatre and Pittsburgh Dance Council offer diverse dance events, while polka,
folk, square, and round dancing are celebrated by the Duquesne University Tamburitzans
, a multicultural academy dedicated to folk traditions. Pittsburgh is also a popular
filming location, with major productions like The Dark Knight Rises filmed in Downtown,
Oakland, and the North Shore. The city is also recognized as the birthplace of the
modern zombie film genre after George A. Romero 's 1968 film Night of the Living Dead
. [ 148 ] [ 149 ] Major art museums include the Andy Warhol Museum , the Carnegie
Museum of Art , The Frick Pittsburgh , Pittsburgh Center for the Arts , the Mattress
Factory , and the Carnegie Museum of Natural History , which holds extensive dinosaur,
mineral, and Egyptian collections. The Kamin Science Center and associated SportsWorks
offer interactive technology and science exhibits. The Heinz History Center , a Smithsonian
affiliate , provides regional history in the Strip District, while the Fort Pitt Museum
is located in Point State Park. The Soldiers and Sailors Memorial Hall and Museum
houses military exhibits, and the Children's Museum of Pittsburgh features interactive
exhibits for kids. The eclectic Bayernhof Music Museum is located six miles (9 km)
from downtown, while The Clemente Museum is in Lawrenceville. The Cathedral of Learning
's Nationality Rooms showcase pre-19th-century learning environments, and architectural