the Tartan Racing team to victory in the 2007 DARPA Grand Challenge . He is also leading
a team of Carnegie Mellon students to win the Google Lunar X Prize . [ 21 ] Whittaker
is the Fredkin Professor of Robotics at the Robotics Institute and the director of
the Robotics Institute's Field Robotics Center [ 22 ] since its creation in 1983.
Whittaker earned his master's and doctoral degrees in Civil Engineering from Carnegie
Mellon in the late 1970s. [ 23 ] Raj Reddy is the University Professor of Computer
Science and Robotics and Moza Bint Nasser Chair at the School of Computer Science
at Carnegie Mellon University . His areas of interest include artificial intelligence
and human-computer interaction . He received the ACM Turning award in 1994. He received
the French Legion of Honour in 1984 and Padma Bhushan award in 2001. He was also awarded
the Honda Prize in 2005, and the Vannevar Bush Award in 2006. [ 24 ] Reddy was the
founding directory of the Robotics Institute [ 25 ] and the Dean of School of Computer
Science. He was one of the founders of the American Association for Artificial Intelligence
[ 26 ] and was its President from 1987 to 1989. [ 27 ] Takeo Kanade is a U. A. and
Helen Whitaker University Professor of Computer Science and Robotics. He is the director
of the Quality of Life Technology Engineering Research Center at Carnegie Mellon.
His main areas of interest include computer vision , multi-media , manipulators, autonomous
mobile robots , and sensors . [ 28 ] Hans Moravec is a research professor at the Robotics
Institute with interests in mobile robots and artificial intelligence . He worked
in the RI's Mobile Robot Lab, a research space designed to produce robots able to
move through intricate indoor and outdoor areas. [ 29 ] He also helped develop Moravec's
paradox in the 1980s, which states that it is more difficult for computers to learn
basic human instincts than human reason. Manuela M. Veloso is the Herbert A. Simon
Professor at the School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University. She is the
President of the International RoboCup Federation that she co-founded and the President
Elect of the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence. She is a
fellow of the American Association for Artificial Intelligence, a fellow of the American
Association for the Advancement of Science, and a Fellow of IEEE. Her research focus
on the scientific and engineering challenges of creating teams of intelligent agents
in complex, dynamic, and uncertain environments, in particular adversarial environments,
such as robot soccer, that Cooperate, Observe the world, Reason, Act, and Learn. She
currently researches and develops effective indoor mobile service robots aiming at
contributing to a multi-robot, multi-human symbiotic relationship, in which robots
and humans coordinate and cooperate as a function of their limitations and strengths.
Manuel Blum is the Bruce Nelson Professor of Computer Science and a Turing Award winner.