buildings at the railyards, including 100 train engines and more than 1, 000 cars.
Forty men were killed, most of them strikers. By 1911, Pittsburgh was producing half
the nation's steel. Pittsburgh was a Republican party stronghold until 1932. The soaring
unemployment of the Great Depression , the New Deal relief programs and the rise of
powerful labor unions in the 1930s turned the city into a liberal stronghold of the
New Deal Coalition under powerful Democratic mayors. In World War II, it was the center
of the " Arsenal of Democracy ", producing munitions for the Allied war effort as
prosperity returned. Following World War II, Pittsburgh launched a clean air and civic
revitalization project known as the "Renaissance". The industrial base continued to
expand through the 1960s, but after 1970 foreign competition led to the collapse of
the steel industry, with massive layoffs and mill closures. Top corporate headquarters
moved out in the 1980s. In 2007 the city lost its status as a major transportation
hub. The population of the Pittsburgh metropolitan area is holding steady at 2. 4
million; 65% of its residents are of European descent and 35% are minorities. Native
American era For thousands of years, Native Americans inhabited the region where the
Allegheny and the Monongahela join to form the Ohio. Paleo-Indians conducted a hunter-gatherer
lifestyle in the region perhaps as early as 19, 000 years ago. Meadowcroft Rockshelter
, an archaeological site west of Pittsburgh, provides evidence that these first Americans
lived in the region from that date. [ 2 ] During the Adena culture that followed,
Mound Builders erected a large Indian Mound at the future site of McKees Rocks , about
three miles (5 km) from the head of the Ohio. The Indian Mound, a burial site, was
augmented in later years by members of the Hopewell culture . [ 3 ] By 1700 the Haudenosaunee
, the Five Nations-based south of the Great Lakes in present-day New York, held dominion
over the upper Ohio valley, reserving it for hunting grounds. Other tribes included
the Lenape , who had been displaced from eastern Pennsylvania by European settlement,
and the Shawnee , who had migrated up from the south. [ 4 ] With the arrival of European
explorers, these tribes and others had been devastated by infectious diseases from
Europe, such as smallpox , measles , influenza , and malaria , to which they had no
immunity. [ 5 ] In 1748, when Conrad Weiser visited Logstown , 18 miles (29 km) downriver
from Pittsburgh, he counted 789 warriors gathered: the Iroquois included 163 Seneca
, 74 Mohawk , 35 Onondaga , 20 Cayuga , and 15 Oneida . Other tribes were 165 Lenape
, 162 Shawnee , 100 Wyandot , 40 Tisagechroami , and 15 Mohican . [ 6 ] Shannopin's
Town , a Lenape (Delaware) village on the east bank of the Allegheny, was established