] Increasing violence, especially by the Shawnee , Miami , and Wyandot tribes, led
to Dunmore's War in 1774. Conflict with Native Americans continued throughout the
Revolutionary War , as some hoped that the war would end with expulsion of the settlers
from their territory. In 1777, Fort Pitt became a United States fort, when Brigadier
General Edward Hand took command. In 1779, Colonel Daniel Brodhead led 600 men from
Fort Pitt to destroy Seneca villages along the upper Allegheny. [ 4 ] With the war
still ongoing, in 1780 Virginia and Pennsylvania came to an agreement on their mutual
borders, creating the state lines known today and determining finally that the jurisdiction
of Pittsburgh region was Pennsylvanian. In 1783, the Revolutionary War ended, which
also brought at least a temporary cessation of border warfare. In the 1784 Treaty
of Fort Stanwix , the Iroquois ceded the land north of the Purchase Line to Pennsylvania.
[ 4 ] After the Revolution, the village of Pittsburgh continued to grow. One of its
earliest industries was boat building . Flatboats could be used to carry large numbers
of pioneers and goods downriver, while keelboats were capable of traveling upriver.
[ 24 ] The village began to develop vital institutions. Hugh Henry Brackenridge ,
a Pittsburgh resident and state legislator, introduced a bill that resulted in a gift
deed of land and a charter for the Pittsburgh Academy on February 28, 1787. The academy
later developed as the University of Western Pennsylvania (1819) and since 1908 has
been known as the University of Pittsburgh . [ 25 ] Many farmers distilled their corn
harvest into whiskey, increasing its value while lowering its transportation costs.
At that time, whiskey was used as a form of currency on the frontier. When the federal
government imposed an excise tax on whiskey, Western Pennsylvania farmers felt victimized,
leading to the Whiskey Rebellion in 1794. Farmers from the region rallied at Braddock's
Field and marched on Pittsburgh. The short-lived rebellion was put down, however,
when President George Washington sent in militias from several states. [ 20 ] The
town continued to grow in manufacturing capability. In 1792, the boatyards in Pittsburgh
built a sloop, Western Experiment. [ 26 ] During the next decades, the yards produced
other large boats. By the 19th century, they were building ocean-going vessels that
shipped goods as far as Europe. In 1794, the town's first courthouse was built; it
was a wooden structure on Market Square. [ 11 ] In 1797, the manufacture of glass
began. [ 27 ] Iron City (1800–1859) Commerce continued to be an essential part of
the economy of early Pittsburgh, but increasingly, manufacture began to grow in importance.
Pittsburgh was located in the middle of one of the most productive coalfields in the
country; the region was also rich in petroleum, natural gas, lumber, and farm goods.
Blacksmiths forged iron implements, from horse shoes to nails. By 1800, the town,