$30 million was given to foundations, charities, and to pensioners. [ 79 ] He was
buried at Sleepy Hollow Cemetery in Sleepy Hollow, New York . The grave site is located
on the Arcadia Hebron plot of land at the corner of Summit Avenue and Dingle Road.
Carnegie is buried only a few yards away from union organizer Samuel Gompers , another
important figure of industry in the Gilded Age . [ 80 ] Controversies 1889: Johnstown
Flood Carnegie was one of more than 50 members of the South Fork Fishing and Hunting
Club , which has been blamed for the Johnstown Flood that killed 2, 209 people in
1889. [ 81 ] At the suggestion of his friend Benjamin Ruff, Carnegie's partner Henry
Clay Frick had formed the exclusive South Fork Fishing and Hunting Club high above
Johnstown, Pennsylvania. The sixty-odd club members were the leading business tycoons
of Western Pennsylvania and included among their number Frick's best friend, Andrew
Mellon , his attorneys Philander Knox and James Hay Reed, as well as Frick's business
partner, Carnegie. High above the city, near the small town of South Fork, the South
Fork Dam was originally built between 1838 and 1853 by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
as part of a canal system to be used as a reservoir for a canal basin in Johnstown.
With the coming-of-age of railroads superseding canal barge transport, the lake was
abandoned by the Commonwealth, sold to the Pennsylvania Railroad, and sold again to
private interests, and eventually came to be owned by the South Fork Fishing and Hunting
Club in 1881. Prior to the flood, speculators had purchased the abandoned reservoir,
made less than well-engineered repairs to the old dam, raised the lake level, built
cottages and a clubhouse, and created the South Fork Fishing and Hunting Club. Less
than 20 miles (32 km) downstream from the dam sat the city of Johnstown. The dam was
72 feet (22 m) high and 931 feet (284 m) long. Between 1881, when the club was opened,
and 1889, the dam frequently sprang leaks and was patched, mostly with mud and straw.
Additionally, a previous owner removed and sold for scrap the three cast iron discharge
pipes that previously allowed a controlled release of water. There had been some speculation
as to the dam's integrity, and concerns had been raised by the head of the Cambria
Iron Works downstream in Johnstown. Such repair work, a reduction in height, and unusually
high snowmelt and heavy spring rains combined to cause the dam to give way on May
31, 1889, resulting in twenty million tons of water sweeping down the valley as the
Johnstown Flood. [ 82 ] When word of the dam's failure was telegraphed to Pittsburgh,
Frick and other members of the South Fork Fishing and Hunting Club gathered to form
the Pittsburgh Relief Committee for assistance to the flood victims as well as determining