Allegheny Health System (13, 000 employees). [ 90 ] [ 91 ] Despite the economic turmoil,
civic improvements continued. In the mid-1970s, Arthur P. Ziegler, Jr. and the Pittsburgh
History and Landmarks Foundation (Landmarks) wanted to demonstrate that historic preservation
could be used to drive economic development without the use of eminent domain or public
subsidies. Landmarks acquired the former terminal buildings and yards of the Pittsburgh
and Lake Erie Railroad , a 1-mile (1. 6 km) long property at the base of Mt. Washington
facing the City of Pittsburgh. In 1976, Landmarks developed the site as a mixed-use
historic adaptive reuse development that gave the foundation the opportunity to put
its urban planning principles into practice. Aided by an initial generous gift from
the Allegheny Foundation in 1976, Landmarks adapted five historic Pittsburgh and Lake
Erie Railroad buildings for new uses and added a hotel, a dock for the Gateway Clipper
fleet, and parking areas. Now shops, offices, restaurants, and entertainment anchor
the historic riverfront site on the south shore of the Monongahela River , opposite
the Golden Triangle (Pittsburgh) . Station Square is Pittsburgh's premier attraction,
generating over 3, 500, 000 visitors a year. It reflects a $100 million investment
from all sources, with the lowest public cost and highest taxpayer return of any major
renewal project in the Pittsburgh region since the 1950s. In 1994, Pittsburgh History
and Landmarks Foundation sold Station Square in to Forest City Enterprises which created
an endowment to help support its restoration efforts and educational programs. Each
year the staff and docents of Pittsburgh History and Landmarks Foundation introduce
more than 10, 000 people – teachers, students, adults, and visitors – to the architectural
heritage of the Pittsburgh region and to the value of historic preservation. [ 92
] During this period, Pittsburgh also became a national model for community development
, through the work of activists such as Dorothy Mae Richardson , who founded Neighborhood
Housing Services in 1968, an organization that became the model for the nationwide
NeighborWorks America . Activists such a Richardson shared the aim of Landmarks to
rehabilitate Pittsburgh's existing built landscape rather than to demolish and redevelop.
In 1985, the J & L Steel site on the north side of the Monongahela river was cleared
and a publicly subsidized High Technology Center was built. The Pittsburgh Technology
Center, home to many major technology companies, is planning major expansion in the
area soon. [ 27 ] In the 1980s, the "Renaissance II" urban revitalization created
numerous new structures, such as PPG Place . In the 1990s, the former sites of the
Homestead, Duquesne and South Side J&L mills were cleared. [ 27 ] In 1992, the new
terminal at Pittsburgh International Airport opened. [ 27 ] In 2001, the aging Three
Rivers Stadium was replaced by Heinz Field and PNC Park , despite being rejected by
voter referendum. In 2010, PPG Paints Arena, replaced the Civic Arena, which at the