(completed 1874). This project was an important proof-of-concept for steel technology,
which marked the opening of a new steel market. Carnegie believed in using his fortune
for others and doing more than making money. In 1868, at age 33, he wrote: [ 38 ]
I propose to take an income no greater than $50, 000 per annum! Beyond this I need
ever earn, make no effort to increase my fortune, but spend the surplus each year
for benevolent purposes! Let us cast aside business forever, except for others. Let
us settle in Oxford and I shall get a thorough education, making the acquaintance
of literary men. I figure that this will take three years' active work. I shall pay
especial attention to speaking in public. We can settle in London and I can purchase
a controlling interest in some newspaper or live review and give the general management
of it attention, taking part in public matters, especially those connected with education
and improvement of the poorer classes. Man must have no idol and the amassing of wealth
is one of the worst species of idolatry ! No idol is more debasing than the worship
of money! Whatever I engage in I must push inordinately; therefore should I be careful
to choose that life which will be the most elevating in its character. To continue
much longer overwhelmed by business cares and with most of my thoughts wholly upon
the way to make more money in the shortest time, must degrade me beyond hope of permanent
recovery. I will resign business at thirty-five, but during these ensuing two years
I wish to spend the afternoons in receiving instruction and in reading systematically!
Industrialist 1875–1900: Steel empire Carnegie made his fortune in the steel industry,
controlling the most extensive integrated iron and steel operations ever owned by
an individual in the United States. One of his two great innovations was in the cheap
and efficient mass production of steel by adopting and adapting the Bessemer process
, which allowed the high carbon content of pig iron to be burnt away in a controlled
and rapid way during steel production . Steel prices dropped as a result, and Bessemer
steel was rapidly adopted for rails; however, it was not suitable for buildings and
bridges. [ 39 ] The second was in his vertical integration of all suppliers of raw
materials. In 1883, Carnegie bought the rival Homestead Steel Works , which included
an extensive plant served by tributary coal and iron fields, a 425-mile-long (684
km) railway, and a line of lake steamships . [ 33 ] In the late 1880s, Carnegie Steel
was the largest manufacturer of pig iron, steel rails, and coke in the world, with
a capacity to produce approximately 2, 000 tons of pig iron per day. By 1889, the
U. S. output of steel exceeded that of the UK, and Carnegie owned a large part of