is a residential community for upperclassmen designated for members of the SPIRIT
student organization, a Black Student Union that serves as a haven for Black students
within the Carnegie Mellon community and champions issues facing the Black community.
[ 155 ] In the early days of Carnegie Tech, there was a single bridge connecting Margaret
Morrison Women's College with the Carnegie Institute of Technology. The bridge was
a meeting place for students. In 1916, the bridge was taken down and the university
filled in the area. The administration built a wooden fence as a new meeting place.
The students did not understand why anyone would want to meet at a fence. The administration
was about to give up and tear it down, but that night a fraternity, as a prank, painted
the entire fence advertising a fraternity party. Ever since, painting the Fence has
been a Carnegie Mellon tradition. [ 156 ] The Fence at Carnegie Mellon lies at the
center of campus, in the area known as "the Cut". Students guard the fence 24 hours
a day, and, as long as two vigils are maintained, no other student may "take" the
fence. The fence can then be painted by the group that has it, but only between midnight
and 6 am. Only hand brushes may be used; the use of spray paint or paint rollers is
considered vandalism and results in a fine. The previous paint cannot be stripped,
and each new painting adds a new layer. The original wooden fence finally collapsed
in the 1990s due to the weight from over 1' of surrounding paint, and was immediately
replaced with an identical one manufactured from concrete. Today the fence is considered
"the world's most painted object" by the Guinness Book of World Records . [ 157 ]
The Carnegie Mellon Tartans were a founding member of the University Athletic Association
of NCAA Division III . Prior to World War II, Carnegie Mellon (as Carnegie Tech) played
with what are now classified as NCAA Division I teams. In 1936, the Carnegie Tech
riflery team won the national intercollegiate championship. [ 158 ] The Carnegie Tech
men's basketball team was a member of the Eastern Intercollegiate Conference throughout
the conference's existence from 1932 to 1939 [ 159 ] and won the conference championship
in 1936, defeating Pittsburgh in a conference championship playoff game. [ 160 ] Varsity
teams are fielded in basketball, track, cross country, football, golf, soccer, swimming
and diving, volleyball, tennis, and softball. In addition, club teams exist in ultimate
frisbee , [ 161 ] rowing , [ 162 ] rugby , lacrosse, hockey, [ 163 ] baseball, [ 164
] softball, skiing & snowboarding , [ 165 ] soccer, volleyball, water polo, [ 166
] and cycling. [ 167 ] Carnegie Mellon Athletics runs a comprehensive and popular
intramural system, maintains facilities (primarily Skibo Gymnasium, Cohon University
Center, Gesling Stadium, and the future Highmark Center for Health, Wellness and Athletics),