Carnegie Mellon became a partner of the Pittsburgh Health Data Alliance to leverage
data analysis in health care. [ 135 ] Discoveries and innovation Computer and applied
sciences Alice (software) – freeware (for non-commercial purposes) object-based educational
programming language with an integrated development environment (IDE). [ 136 ] Andrew
Project – distributed computing environment developed at Carnegie Mellon beginning
in 1982. It was an ambitious project for its time and resulted in an unprecedentedly
vast and accessible university computing infrastructure. The goal was to have connected
3M computer workstations. [ 137 ] Artificial intelligence – Several of the first AI
software programs were created at Carnegie Mellon. These include the Logic Theorist
, General Problem Solver , and Soar . Autonomous vehicle – Navlab , the first autonomous
car program was developed by Carnegie Mellon. Since then, H1ghlander and Sandstorm
autonomous vehicles were developed at Carnegie Mellon and placed 3rd and 2nd in the
DARPA Grand Challenge and Carnegie Mellon's Boss won the DARPA Grand Challenge (2007)
. [ 138 ] The university continues to be a leader in autonomous research and development.
Dynamic random-access memory – In 1966, Robert H. Dennard invented the one-transistor
memory cell consisting of a transistor and a capacitor for which a patent was issued
in 1968. It became the basis for today's dynamic random-access memory (DRAM). MEMS
– Harvey C. Nathanson invented the first MEMS (micro-electro-mechanical systems) device
of the type now found in products ranging from iPhones to automobiles. Typical MEMS
devices include the accelerometers found in smartphones and video game controllers,
and the gyroscopes used in automobiles and wearables. Xerox PARC – Founded in 1969
by George Pake and Jack Goldman, Xerox PARC has been at the heart of numerous revolutionary
computer developments as laser printing, Ethernet, the modern personal computer, graphical
user interface (GUI) and desktop paradigm, object-oriented programming, ubiquitous
computing, electronic paper, amorphous silicon (a-Si) applications, the computer mouse,
and advancing very-large-scale integration (VLSI) for semiconductors. BLISS – system
programming language developed at Carnegie Mellon by W. A. Wulf , D. B. Russell ,
and A. N. Habermann around 1970. It was perhaps the best known systems programming
language until C made its debut in 1972. [ 139 ] Emoticon – The first true emoticon
was developed at Carnegie Mellon by Scott Fahlman in 1982. Hashtag – In a 2007 tweet,
Chris Messina proposed vertical/associational grouping of messages, trends, and events
on Twitter by the means of hashtags. Java – class-based object oriented programming
language that was originally developed by James Gosling at Sun Microsystems (which
has since been acquired by Oracle ) and released in 1995 as a core component of Sun
Microsystems' Java platform. Mach (kernel) – Richard Rashid and Avie Tevanian developed
Mach at Carnegie Mellon from 1985 to 1994, ending with Mach 3. 0, which is a true
microkernel . Mach was developed as a replacement for the kernel in the BSD version