lieu of selecting three to four general management concentrations, second year students
may complete courses in satisfaction of specialized MBA Tracks . [ 23 ] The Center
for Innovation and Entrepreneurship at Tepper holds an annual Venture Competition
every spring in three tracks: Technology, Life Sciences, and Sustainable Technology.
Teams from many universities and countries compete for cash prizes and venture startup
assistance. Entrepreneurship education was pioneered at the school in the 1970s, under
the leadership of Mr. Jack Thorne. The Management Game was first introduced by Carnegie
Mellon in 1958 and has been adopted by many other business schools as an effective
business simulation model. Tepper students work with an external board of directors
to manage a multinational corporation, guiding the organization through a wide range
of issues including global expansion, labor negotiations, operations, market share
, shifting economies and financial performance. [ 24 ] MBA students also have a Capstone
project, which is like a culmination of all the students work at Tepper. It is akin
to a final year project where the students work with various firms on real world problems.
The General Management MBA Track, the core track serves as an umbrella academic option
due to the flexibility associated with multiple concentrations. The General Management
MBA Track complements the eight other Tepper MBA Tracks: Analytical Marketing Strategy,
Biotechnology , Entrepreneurship in Organizations, Global Enterprise Management, Management
of Innovation & Product Development, Technology Leadership, Operations Research ,
and Investment Strategy . [ 25 ] Tepper also offers the following joint and dual MBA
degrees: [ 26 ] In fall 2020, there were 586 [ 20 ] total students enrolled in the
full-time MBA program. MS in Computational Finance The Master of Science in Computational
Finance (MSCF) degree is primarily granted through a sixteen-month full-time program.
The school also offers a thirty-three-month part-time degree program and four non-degree
certificate programs. Certificate students focus on one "stream" of the MSCF degree
curriculum: Mathematics, Statistics, or Financial Computing . [ 28 ] The curriculum
consists of courses in finance, traditional finance theories of equity and bond portfolio
management , the stochastic calculus models on which derivative trading is based,
the application of these models in both fixed income markets and equity markets ,
computational methods including Monte Carlo simulation and finite difference approximations
of partial differential equations , and statistical methodologies including regression
and time series, culminating with courses on statistical arbitrage , risk management
and dynamic asset management . Early in the program, students are taught C++ , which
enables them to build the computational financial models necessary for their finance
courses. The program's capstone is a sophisticated financial computing course. [ 28
] Twenty full-time faculty instruct 40 full-time students in Pittsburgh and 51 full
and part-time students in the financial district of New York City . [ 28 ] The primary
method of instruction for the New York campus is live, interactive video. Lectures
are recorded and made immediately available to students via the internet. Faculty