, Caravan Theatre of Pittsburgh , Pittsburgh Civic Light Opera , Pittsburgh Playwrights
Theatre Company , Stage Right , and Pittsburgh Irish and Classical Theatre . The Pittsburgh
New Works Festival utilizes local theatre companies to stage productions of original
one-act plays by playwrights from all parts of the country. Similarly, Future Ten
showcases new ten-minute plays. Saint Vincent Summer Theatre , Off the Wall Productions
, Mountain Playhouse , and Stage Right! in nearby Latrobe , Carnegie , Jennerstown
, and Greensburg , respectively, employ Pittsburgh actors and contribute to the culture
of the region. August Wilson , one of the best known playwrights of his generation,
was a Pittsburgh native. The majority of his plays are set in the city as well including
the two he won the Pulitzer Prize for Drama for ( Fences (play) and The Piano Lesson
). Friday Nite Improvs , an improv show at the University of Pittsburgh 's Cathedral
of Learning , is Pittsburgh's longest-running theatre show. It has produced a number
of professional writers and actors. Since 1991, the Gene Kelly Awards have honored
students in drama in the region, giving a platform to some who have gone on to both
theater and film careers. Traditional Pittsburgh foods reflect the city's multicultural
heritage, especially that of the European immigrants of the early 20th century. While
these immigrant populations introduced dishes such as pierogis to the city, they are
now enjoyed by Pittsburghers in general. Other Pittsburgh food specialties were developed
in the city. In general, these dishes are still popular because for many years, they
satisfied the hearty appetite of the archetypal Pittsburgher: the hard-working, blue-collar
steelworker. Cabbage rolls –(aka Halupki )– Beef, pork, rice, green pepper, wrapped
in cabbage and baked with sauerkraut and tomato soup or juice. Chipped Ham – (aka
Chipped Chopped Ham) thinly sliced processed ham, from Isaly's since 1933. City Chicken
– cubes of pork and/or veal baked or fried on a wooden skewer. Clark Bar – chocolate
candy bar; developed in the city in 1917. Essie's Original Hot Dog shop - an Oakland
staple since 1960. Closed permanently in 2020 amidst the Covid-19 pandemic. Halušky
– noodles with fried cabbage (Polish), or cottage cheese (Slovak). Iron City Beer
– native brew; with a shot of whiskey, a boilermaker ; with a shot of Imperial, an
imp-n-arn. Italian sausage – with grilled peppers and onions. Kielbasa – eastern European
sausages. Pepperoni roll - an Italian American snack made of soft white bread with
pepperoni and cheese in the middle. Various shops in the Strip District as well as
Giant Eagle sell this snack in Pittsburgh. Pierogi – Polish dish, pasta dough filled
with potato and cheese, onion or sauerkraut. Primanti Brothers – sandwich with fries
and coleslaw in it. Sarris Candies - chocolates and ice cream originating in Canonsburg
Teutonia Männerchor - Deutschtown (East Allegheny) German food . Wholey's – Founded
in 1912 in Pittsburgh's market square and now located on Penn Ave; Wholey's serves