influx of new students and rapid expansion of Pitt's size and scope. In the 1970s,
Pitt's football team returned to greatness with a national championship season in
1976 led by Hall of Fame running back Tony Dorsett and continued success in the 1980s
with players such as Hall of Fame quarterback Dan Marino . In the 1980s, significant
medical research in the field of organ transplantation was conducted by Thomas Starzl
, establishing Pitt as the world leader in the field of organ transplantation. In
1991, chancellor Wesley Posvar retired after 24 years in office. His administration
is best known for elimination of the university's debt from its 1960s financial crisis
and for increasing the school's prestige and endowment. Under Posvar, Pitt's operating
budget grew sevenfold to $630 million and its endowment tripled to $257 million. [
29 ] Mark Nordenberg was chancellor of the university from 1995 to 2014 and led Pitt
through a period of substantial progress, including a $2-billion capital-raising campaign
that is over three quarters of the way toward achieving its goal [ 30 ] and a $1-billion
12-year facilities plan. [ 31 ] Major initiatives and events that have occurred during
his tenure include the construction of the Petersen Events Center , a major expansion
of on-campus housing, the growth of the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center and
the restructuring of its relationship with the university, and a series of disruptive
bomb threats that occurred in 2012. Patrick D. Gallagher was named the 18th chancellor
of the university and assumed the office on August 1, 2014. [ 32 ] The University
of Pittsburgh's main campus comprises approximately 132 urban acres (0. 53 km 2 )
located in Pittsburgh's historic Oakland neighborhood. Much of the campus, including
its centerpiece 42-story Cathedral of Learning , falls within the Oakland Civic Center/Schenley
Farms National Historic District . [ 33 ] contains an eclectic mix of architecture
that includes Greek revival, Neogothic, Italian Renaissance, and modern. [ citation
needed ] It has been termed "a theme park of replica buildings, representing the architecture
of the past speaking to the present. " [ 34 ] The University of Pittsburgh's main
campus contains four contiguous sections: upper (sports complexes, residence halls
); mid ( Benedum , Chevron , Allen and Thaw Halls ); lower ( Cathedral of Learning
, Union , Posvar Hall ); and on the west end of campus, the medical center complex
. The campus is bordered by Darragh Street/McKee Place to the west and Bellefield
Avenue/Dithridge Street to the east; Forbes and Fifth avenues traverse the campus
from west to east. Although generally within walking distance, the university also
runs a bus and shuttle service between various campus locations and bordering neighborhoods.
[ 35 ] The main campus is within walking distance of many recreational, cultural,
and educational institutions in the Oakland neighborhood. The campus is adjacent to
Schenley Plaza , the main branch of the Carnegie Public Library , the Carnegie Museums